## Adventuring

Adventuring") and fighting ("Combat").
Languages
By virtue of your race, your character can speak,
read, and write certain languages.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Subraces
Some races have subraces. Members of a subrace
have the traits of the parent race in addition to the
traits specified for their subrace. Relationships
among subraces vary significantly from race to race
and world to world.
Dwarf
Dwarf Traits
Your dwarf character has an assortment of inborn
abilities, part and parcel of dwarven nature.
Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score
increases by 2.
Age. Dwarves mature at the same rate as humans,
but they're considered young until they reach the
age of 50. On average, they live about 350 years.
Alignment. Most dwarves are lawful, believing
firmly in the benefits of a well-ordered society. They
tend toward good as well, with a strong sense of fair
play and a belief that everyone deserves to share in
the benefits of a just order.
Size. Dwarves stand between 4 and 5 feet tall and
average about 150 pounds. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feet. Your
speed is not reduced by wearing heavy armor.
Darkvision. Accustomed to life underground, you
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You
can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were
bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light.
You can't discern color in darkness, only shades of
gray.
Dwarven Resilience. You have advantage on
saving throws against poison, and you have
resistance against poison damage.
Dwarven Combat Training. You have proficiency
with the battleaxe, handaxe, light hammer, and
warhammer.
Tool Proficiency. You gain proficiency with the
artisan's tools of your choice: smith's tools, brewer's
supplies, or mason's tools.
Stonecunning. Whenever you make an
Intelligence (History) check related to the origin of
stonework, you are considered proficient in the
History skill and add double your proficiency bonus
to the check, instead of your normal proficiency
bonus.
Languages. You can speak, read, and write
Common and Dwarvish. Dwarvish is full of hard
consonants and guttural sounds, and those
characteristics spill over into whatever other
language a dwarf might speak.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 3

---

Hill Dwarf
As a hill dwarf, you have keen senses, deep intuition,
and remarkable resilience.
Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score
increases by 1.
Dwarven Toughness. Your hit point maximum
increases by 1, and it increases by 1 every time you
gain a level.
Elf
Elf Traits
Your elf character has a variety of natural abilities,
the result of thousands of years of elven refinement.
Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score
increases by 2.
Age. Although elves reach physical maturity at
about the same age as humans, the elven
understanding of adulthood goes beyond physical
growth to encompass worldly experience. An elf
typically claims adulthood and an adult name
around the age of 100 and can live to be 750 years
old.
Alignment. Elves love freedom, variety, and self-
expression, so they lean strongly toward the gentler
aspects of chaos. They value and protect others'
freedom as well as their own, and they are more
often good than not.
Size. Elves range from under 5 to over 6 feet tall
and have slender builds. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. Accustomed to twilit forests and the
night sky, you have superior vision in dark and dim
conditions. You can see in dim light within 60 feet of
you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it
were dim light. You can't discern color in darkness,
only shades of gray.
Keen Senses. You have proficiency in the
Perception skill.
Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving
throws against being charmed, and magic can't put
you to sleep.
Trance. Elves don't need to sleep. Instead, they
meditate deeply, remaining semiconscious, for 4
hours a day. (The Common word for such meditation
is "trance.") While meditating, you can dream after a
fashion; such dreams are actually mental exercises
that have become reflexive through years of practice.
After resting in this way, you gain the same benefit
that a human does from 8 hours of sleep.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Languages. You can speak, read, and write
Common and Elvish. Elvish is fluid, with subtle
intonations and intricate grammar. Elven literature
is rich and varied, and their songs and poems are
famous among other races. Many bards learn their
language so they can add Elvish ballads to their
repertoires.
High Elf
As a high elf, you have a keen mind and a mastery of
at least the basics of magic. In many fantasy gaming
worlds, there are two kinds of high elves. One type is
haughty and reclusive, believing themselves to be
superior to non-elves and even other elves. The
other type is more common and more friendly, and
often encountered among humans and other races.
Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence score
increases by 1.
Elf Weapon Training. You have proficiency with
the longsword, shortsword, shortbow, and longbow.
Cantrip. You know one cantrip of your choice
from the wizard spell list. Intelligence is your
spellcasting ability for it.
Extra Language. You can speak, read, and write
one extra language of your choice.
Halfling
Halfling Traits
Your halfling character has a number of traits in
common with all other halflings.
Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score
increases by 2.
Age. A halfling reaches adulthood at the age of 20
and generally lives into the middle of his or her
second century.
Alignment. Most halflings are lawful good. As a
rule, they are good-hearted and kind, hate to see
others in pain, and have no tolerance for oppression.
They are also very orderly and traditional, leaning
heavily on the support of their community and the
comfort of their old ways.
Size. Halflings average about 3 feet tall and weigh
about 40 pounds. Your size is Small.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feet.
Lucky. When you roll a 1 on the d20 for an attack
roll, ability check, or saving throw, you can reroll the
die and must use the new roll.
Brave. You have advantage on saving throws
against being frightened.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 4

---

Halfling Nimbleness. You can move through the
space of any creature that is of a size larger than
yours.
Languages. You can speak, read, and write
Common and Halfling. The Halfling language isn't
secret, but halflings are loath to share it with others.
They write very little, so they don't have a rich body
of literature. Their oral tradition, however, is very
strong. Almost all halflings speak Common to
converse with the people in whose lands they dwell
or through which they are traveling.
Lightfoot
As a lightfoot halfling, you can easily hide from
notice, even using other people as cover. You're
inclined to be affable and get along well with others.
Lightfoots are more prone to wanderlust than
other halflings, and often dwell alongside other races
or take up a nomadic life.
Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score
increases by 1.
Naturally Stealthy. You can attempt to hide even
when you are obscured only by a creature that is at
least one size larger than you.
Human
Human Traits
It's hard to make generalizations about humans, but
your human character has these traits.
Ability Score Increase. Your ability scores each
increase by 1.
Age. Humans reach adulthood in their late teens
and live less than a century.
Alignment. Humans tend toward no particular
alignment. The best and the worst are found among
them.
Size. Humans vary widely in height and build,
from barely 5 feet to well over 6 feet tall. Regardless
of your position in that range, your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
Languages. You can speak, read, and write
Common and one extra language of your choice.
Humans typically learn the languages of other
peoples they deal with, including obscure dialects.
They are fond of sprinkling their speech with words
borrowed from other tongues: Orc curses, Elvish
musical expressions, Dwarvish military phrases, and
so on.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Dragonborn
Dragonborn Traits
Your draconic heritage manifests in a variety of
traits you share with other dragonborn.
Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score
increases by 2, and your Charisma score increases
by 1.
Age. Young dragonborn grow quickly. They walk
hours after hatching, attain the size and
development of a 10-year-old human child by the
age of 3, and reach adulthood by 15. They live to be
around 80.
Alignment. Dragonborn tend to extremes, making
a conscious choice for one side or the other in the
cosmic war between good and evil. Most dragonborn
are good, but those who side with evil can be terrible
villains.
Size. Dragonborn are taller and heavier than
humans, standing well over 6 feet tall and averaging
almost 250 pounds. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
Draconic Ancestry
Dragon Damage Type Breath Weapon
Black Acid 5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
Blue Lightning 5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
Brass Fire 5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
Bronze Lightning 5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
Copper Acid 5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
Gold Fire 15 ft. cone (Dex. save)
Green Poison 15 ft. cone (Con. save)
Red Fire 15 ft. cone (Dex. save)
Silver Cold 15 ft. cone (Con. save)
White Cold 15 ft. cone (Con. save)
Draconic Ancestry. You have draconic ancestry.
Choose one type of dragon from the Draconic
Ancestry table. Your breath weapon and damage
resistance are determined by the dragon type, as
shown in the table.
Breath Weapon. You can use your action to
exhale destructive energy. Your draconic ancestry
determines the size, shape, and damage type of the
exhalation.
When you use your breath weapon, each creature
in the area of the exhalation must make a saving
throw, the type of which is determined by your
draconic ancestry. The DC for this saving throw
equals 8 + your Constitution modifier + your
proficiency bonus. A creature takes 2d6 damage on a
failed save, and half as much damage on a successful
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 5

---

one. The damage increases to 3d6 at 6th level, 4d6 at
11th level, and 5d6 at 16th level.
After you use your breath weapon, you can't use it
again until you complete a short or long rest.
Damage Resistance. You have resistance to the
damage type associated with your draconic ancestry.
Languages. You can speak, read, and write
Common and Draconic. Draconic is thought to be one
of the oldest languages and is often used in the study
of magic. The language sounds harsh to most other
creatures and includes numerous hard consonants
and sibilants.
Gnome
Gnome Traits
Your gnome character has certain characteristics in
common with all other gnomes.
Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence score
increases by 2.
Age. Gnomes mature at the same rate humans do,
and most are expected to settle down into an adult
life by around age 40. They can live 350 to almost
500 years.
Alignment. Gnomes are most often good. Those
who tend toward law are sages, engineers,
researchers, scholars, investigators, or inventors.
Those who tend toward chaos are minstrels,
tricksters, wanderers, or fanciful jewelers. Gnomes
are good-hearted, and even the tricksters among
them are more playful than vicious.
Size. Gnomes are between 3 and 4 feet tall and
average about 40 pounds. Your size is Small.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feet.
Darkvision. Accustomed to life underground, you
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You
can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were
bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light.
You can't discern color in darkness, only shades of
gray.
Gnome Cunning. You have advantage on all
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws
against magic.
Languages. You can speak, read, and write
Common and Gnomish. The Gnomish language,
which uses the Dwarvish script, is renowned for its
technical treatises and its catalogs of knowledge
about the natural world.
Rock Gnome
As a rock gnome, you have a natural inventiveness
and hardiness beyond that of other gnomes.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score
increases by 1.
Artificer's Lore. Whenever you make an
Intelligence (History) check related to magic items,
alchemical objects, or technological devices, you can
add twice your proficiency bonus, instead of any
proficiency bonus you normally apply.
Tinker. You have proficiency with artisan's tools
(tinker's tools). Using those tools, you can spend 1
hour and 10 gp worth of materials to construct a
Tiny clockwork device (AC 5, 1 hp). The device
ceases to function after 24 hours (unless you spend
1 hour repairing it to keep the device functioning),
or when you use your action to dismantle it; at that
time, you can reclaim the materials used to create it.
You can have up to three such devices active at a
time.
When you create a device, choose one of the
following options:
Clockwork Toy. This toy is a clockwork animal,
monster, or person, such as a frog, mouse, bird,
dragon, or soldier. When placed on the ground, the
toy moves 5 feet across the ground on each of your
turns in a random direction. It makes noises as
appropriate to the creature it represents.
Fire Starter. The device produces a miniature flame,
which you can use to light a candle, torch, or
campfire. Using the device requires your action.
Music Box. When opened, this music box plays a
single song at a moderate volume. The box stops
playing when it reaches the song's end or when it
is closed.
Half-Elf
Half-Elf Traits
Your half-elf character has some qualities in
common with elves and some that are unique to
half-elves.
Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score
increases by 2, and two other ability scores of your
choice increase by 1.
Age. Half-elves mature at the same rate humans
do and reach adulthood around the age of 20. They
live much longer than humans, however, often
exceeding 180 years.
Alignment. Half-elves share the chaotic bent of
their elven heritage. They value both personal
freedom and creative expression, demonstrating
neither love of leaders nor desire for followers. They
chafe at rules, resent others' demands, and
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 6

---

sometimes prove unreliable, or at least
unpredictable.
Size. Half-elves are about the same size as humans,
ranging from 5 to 6 feet tall. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. Thanks to your elf blood, you have
superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You can
see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were
bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light.
You can't discern color in darkness, only shades of
gray.
Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving
throws against being charmed, and magic can't put
you to sleep.
Skill Versatility. You gain proficiency in two skills
of your choice.
Languages. You can speak, read, and write
Common, Elvish, and one extra language of your
choice.
Half-Orc
Half-Orc Traits
Your half-orc character has certain traits deriving
from your orc ancestry.
Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score
increases by 2, and your Constitution score increases
by 1.
Age. Half-orcs mature a little faster than humans,
reaching adulthood around age 14. They age
noticeably faster and rarely live longer than 75 years.
Alignment. Half-orcs inherit a tendency toward
chaos from their orc parents and are not strongly
inclined toward good. Half-orcs raised among orcs
and willing to live out their lives among them are
usually evil.
Size. Half-orcs are somewhat larger and bulkier
than humans, and they range from 5 to well over 6
feet tall. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. Thanks to your orc blood, you have
superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You can
see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were
bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light.
You can't discern color in darkness, only shades of
gray.
Menacing. You gain proficiency in the
Intimidation skill.
Relentless Endurance. When you are reduced to 0
hit points but not killed outright, you can drop to 1
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

hit point instead. You can't use this feature again
until you finish a long rest.
Savage Attacks. When you score a critical hit with
a melee weapon attack, you can roll one of the
weapon's damage dice one additional time and add it
to the extra damage of the critical hit.
Languages. You can speak, read, and write
Common and Orc. Orc is a harsh, grating language
with hard consonants. It has no script of its own but
is written in the Dwarvish script.
Tiefling
Tiefling Traits
Tieflings share certain racial traits as a result of their
infernal descent.
Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence score
increases by 1, and your Charisma score increases
by 2.
Age. Tieflings mature at the same rate as humans
but live a few years longer.
Alignment. Tieflings might not have an innate
tendency toward evil, but many of them end up
there. Evil or not, an independent nature inclines
many tieflings toward a chaotic alignment.
Size. Tieflings are about the same size and build as
humans. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. Thanks to your infernal heritage, you
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You
can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were
bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light.
You can't discern color in darkness, only shades of
gray.
Hellish Resistance. You have resistance to fire
damage.
Infernal Legacy. You know the thaumaturgy
cantrip. When you reach 3rd level, you can cast the
hellish rebuke spell as a 2nd-level spell once with this
trait and regain the ability to do so when you finish a
long rest. When you reach 5th level, you can cast the
darkness spell once with this trait and regain the
ability to do so when you finish a long rest. Charisma
is your spellcasting ability for these spells.
Languages. You can speak, read, and write
Common and Infernal.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 7

---

Barbarian
Class Features
As a barbarian, you gain the following class features.
Hit Points
Hit Dice: 1d12 per barbarian level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 12 + your Constitution
modifier
Hit Points at Higher Levels: 1d12 (or 7) + your
Constitution modifier per barbarian level after 1st
Proficiencies
Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields
Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Strength, Constitution
Skills: Choose two from Animal Handling, Athletics,
Intimidation, Nature, Perception, and Survival
Equipment
You start with the following equipment, in addition
to the equipment granted by your background:
 (a) a greataxe or (b) any martial melee weapon
 (a) two handaxes or (b) any simple weapon
 An explorer's pack and four javelins
The Barbarian
Proficiency Rage
Level Bonus Features Rages Damage
1st +2 Rage, 2 +2
Unarmored
Defense
2nd +2 Reckless 2 +2
Attack,
Danger Sense
3rd +2 Primal Path 3 +2
4th +2 Ability Score 3 +2
Improvement
5th +3 Extra Attack, 3 +2
Fast
Movement
6th +3 Path feature 4 +2
7th +3 Feral Instinct 4 +2
8th +3 Ability Score 4 +2
Improvement
9th +4 Brutal Critical 4 +3
(1 die)
10th +4 Path feature 4 +3
11th +4 Relentless 4 +3
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Rage
12th +4 Ability Score 5 +3
Improvement
13th +5 Brutal Critical 5 +3
(2 dice)
14th +5 Path feature 5 +3
15th +5 Persistent 5 +3
Rage
16th +5 Ability Score 5 +4
Improvement
17th +6 Brutal Critical 6 +4
(3 dice)
18th +6 Indomitable 6 +4
Might
19th +6 Ability Score 6 +4
Improvement
20th +6 Primal Unlimited +4
Champion
Rage
In battle, you fight with primal ferocity. On your turn,
you can enter a rage as a bonus action.
While raging, you gain the following benefits if you
aren't wearing heavy armor:
 You have advantage on Strength checks and
Strength saving throws.
 When you make a melee weapon attack using
Strength, you gain a bonus to the damage roll that
increases as you gain levels as a barbarian, as
shown in the Rage Damage column of the
Barbarian table.
 You have resistance to bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing damage.
If you are able to cast spells, you can't cast them or
concentrate on them while raging.
Your rage lasts for 1 minute. It ends early if you
are knocked unconscious or if your turn ends and
you haven't attacked a hostile creature since your
last turn or taken damage since then. You can also
end your rage on your turn as a bonus action.
Once you have raged the number of times shown
for your barbarian level in the Rages column of the
Barbarian table, you must finish a long rest before
you can rage again.
Unarmored Defense
While you are not wearing any armor, your Armor
Class equals 10 + your Dexterity modifier + your
Constitution modifier. You can use a shield and still
gain this benefit.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 8

---

Reckless Attack
Starting at 2nd level, you can throw aside all concern
for defense to attack with fierce desperation. When
you make your first attack on your turn, you can
decide to attack recklessly. Doing so gives you
advantage on melee weapon attack rolls using
Strength during this turn, but attack rolls against
you have advantage until your next turn.
Danger Sense
At 2nd level, you gain an uncanny sense of when
things nearby aren't as they should be, giving you an
edge when you dodge away from danger.
You have advantage on Dexterity saving throws
against effects that you can see, such as traps and
spells. To gain this benefit, you can't be blinded,
deafened, or incapacitated.
Primal Path
At 3rd level, you choose a path that shapes the
nature of your rage. Choose the Path of the
Berserker or the Path of the Totem Warrior, both
detailed at the end of the class description. Your
choice grants you features at 3rd level and again at
6th, 10th, and 14th levels.
Ability Score Improvement
When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th,
16th, and 19th level, you can increase one ability
score of your choice by 2, or you can increase two
ability scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you
can't increase an ability score above 20 using this
feature.
Extra Attack
Beginning at 5th level, you can attack twice, instead
of once, whenever you take the Attack action on your
turn.
Fast Movement
Starting at 5th level, your speed increases by 10 feet
while you aren't wearing heavy armor.
Feral Instinct
By 7th level, your instincts are so honed that you
have advantage on initiative rolls.
Additionally, if you are surprised at the beginning
of combat and aren't incapacitated, you can act
normally on your first turn, but only if you enter
your rage before doing anything else on that turn.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Brutal Critical
Beginning at 9th level, you can roll one additional
weapon damage die when determining the extra
damage for a critical hit with a melee attack.
This increases to two additional dice at 13th level
and three additional dice at 17th level.
Relentless Rage
Starting at 11th level, your rage can keep you
fighting despite grievous wounds. If you drop to 0 hit
points while you're raging and don't die outright,
you can make a DC 10 Constitution saving throw. If
you succeed, you drop to 1 hit point instead.
Each time you use this feature after the first, the
DC increases by 5. When you finish a short or long
rest, the DC resets to 10.
Persistent Rage
Beginning at 15th level, your rage is so fierce that it
ends early only if you fall unconscious or if you
choose to end it.
Indomitable Might
Beginning at 18th level, if your total for a Strength
check is less than your Strength score, you can use
that score in place of the total.
Primal Champion
At 20th level, you embody the power of the wilds.
Your Strength and Constitution scores increase by 4.
Your maximum for those scores is now 24.
Path of the Berserker
For some barbarians, rage is a means to an end-
that end being violence. The Path of the Berserker is
a path of untrammeled fury, slick with blood. As you
enter the berserker's rage, you thrill in the chaos of
battle, heedless of your own health or well-being.
Frenzy
Starting when you choose this path at 3rd level, you
can go into a frenzy when you rage. If you do so, for
the duration of your rage you can make a single
melee weapon attack as a bonus action on each of
your turns after this one. When your rage ends, you
suffer one level of exhaustion (as described in
appendix PH-A).
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 9

---

Mindless Rage
Beginning at 6th level, you can't be charmed or
frightened while raging. If you are charmed or
frightened when you enter your rage, the effect is
suspended for the duration of the rage.
Intimidating Presence
Beginning at 10th level, you can use your action to
frighten someone with your menacing presence.
When you do so, choose one creature that you can
see within 30 feet of you. If the creature can see or
hear you, it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw
(DC equal to 8 + your proficiency bonus + your
Charisma modifier) or be frightened of you until the
end of your next turn. On subsequent turns, you can
use your action to extend the duration of this effect
on the frightened creature until the end of your next
turn. This effect ends if the creature ends its turn out
of line of sight or more than 60 feet away from you.
If the creature succeeds on its saving throw, you
can't use this feature on that creature again for 24
hours.
Retaliation
Starting at 14th level, when you take damage from a
creature that is within 5 feet of you, you can use your
reaction to make a melee weapon attack against that
creature.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 10

---

Bard
Class Features
As a bard, you gain the following class features.
Hit Points
Hit Dice: 1d8 per bard level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution
modifier
Hit Points at Higher Levels: 1d8 (or 5) + your
Constitution modifier per bard level after 1st
Proficiencies
Armor: Light armor
The Bard
Proficiency Cantrips
Level Bonus Features Known
1st +2 Spellcasting, Bardic Inspiration 2
(d6)
2nd +2 Jack of All Trades, Song of Rest 2
(d6)
3rd +2 Bard College, Expertise 2
4th +2 Ability Score Improvement 3
5th +3 Bardic Inspiration (d8), Font of 3
Inspiration
6th +3 Countercharm, Bard College 3
feature
7th +3 3
8th +3 Ability Score Improvement 3
9th +4 Song of Rest (d8) 3
10th +4 Bardic Inspiration (d10), 4
Expertise, Magical Secrets
11th +4 4
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement 4
13th +5 Song of Rest (d10) 4
14th +5 Magical Secrets, Bard College 4
feature
15th +5 Bardic Inspiration (d12) 4
16th +5 Ability Score Improvement 4
17th +6 Song of Rest (d12) 4
18th +6 Magical Secrets 4
19th +6 Ability Score Improvement 4
20th +6 Superior Inspiration 4


## Spellcasting

Spellcasting
You have learned to untangle and reshape the fabric
of reality in harmony with your wishes and music.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Weapons: Simple weapons, hand crossbows,
longswords, rapiers, shortswords
Tools: Three musical instruments of your choice
Saving Throws: Dexterity, Charisma
Skills: Choose any three
Equipment
You start with the following equipment, in addition
to the equipment granted by your background:
 (a) a rapier, (b) a longsword, or (c) any simple
weapon
 (a) a diplomat's pack or (b) an entertainer's pack
 (a) a lute or (b) any other musical instrument
 Leather armor and a dagger
s Spells -Spell Slots per Spell Level-
Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
4 2 
5 3 
6 4 2 
7 4 3 
8 4 3 2 
9 4 3 3 
10 4 3 3 1 
11 4 3 3 2 
12 4 3 3 3 1 
14 4 3 3 3 2 
15 4 3 3 3 2 1 
15 4 3 3 3 2 1 
16 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 
18 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 
19 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 1 
19 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 1 
20 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 1 1
22 4 3 3 3 3 1 1 1 1
22 4 3 3 3 3 2 1 1 1
22 4 3 3 3 3 2 2 1 1
Your spells are part of your vast repertoire, magic
that you can tune to different situations.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 11

---

Cantrips
You know two cantrips of your choice from the bard
spell list. You learn additional bard cantrips of your
choice at higher levels, as shown in the Cantrips
Known column of the Bard table.
Spell Slots
The Bard table shows how many spell slots you have
to cast your spells of 1st level and higher. To cast
one of these spells, you must expend a slot of the
spell's level or higher. You regain all expended spell
slots when you finish a long rest.
For example, if you know the 1st-level spell cure
wounds and have a 1st-level and a 2nd-level spell
slot available, you can cast cure wounds using either
slot.
Spells Known of 1st Level and Higher
You know four 1st-level spells of your choice from
the bard spell list.
The Spells Known column of the Bard table shows
when you learn more bard spells of your choice.
Each of these spells must be of a level for which you
have spell slots, as shown on the table. For instance,
when you reach 3rd level in this class, you can learn
one new spell of 1st or 2nd level.
Additionally, when you gain a level in this class,
you can choose one of the bard spells you know and
replace it with another spell from the bard spell list,
which also must be of a level for which you have
spell slots.
Spellcasting Ability
Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your bard
spells. Your magic comes from the heart and soul
you pour into the performance of your music or
oration. You use your Charisma whenever a spell
refers to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you
use your Charisma modifier when setting the saving
throw DC for a bard spell you cast and when making
an attack roll with one.
Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus +
your Charisma modifier
Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus +
your Charisma modifier
Ritual Casting
You can cast any bard spell you know as a ritual if
that spell has the ritual tag.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Spellcasting Focus
You can use a musical instrument (see "Equipment")
as a spellcasting focus for your bard spells.
Bardic Inspiration
You can inspire others through stirring words or
music. To do so, you use a bonus action on your turn
to choose one creature other than yourself within 60
feet of you who can hear you. That creature gains
one Bardic Inspiration die, a d6.
Once within the next 10 minutes, the creature can
roll the die and add the number rolled to one ability
check, attack roll, or saving throw it makes. The
creature can wait until after it rolls the d20 before
deciding to use the Bardic Inspiration die, but must
decide before the GM says whether the roll succeeds
or fails. Once the Bardic Inspiration die is rolled, it is
lost. A creature can have only one Bardic Inspiration
die at a time.
You can use this feature a number of times equal
to your Charisma modifier (a minimum of once). You
regain any expended uses when you finish a long
rest.
Your Bardic Inspiration die changes when you
reach certain levels in this class. The die becomes a
d8 at 5th level, a d10 at 10th level, and a d12 at 15th
level.
Jack of All Trades
Starting at 2nd level, you can add half your
proficiency bonus, rounded down, to any ability
check you make that doesn't already include your
proficiency bonus.
Song of Rest
Beginning at 2nd level, you can use soothing music
or oration to help revitalize your wounded allies
during a short rest. If you or any friendly creatures
who can hear your performance regain hit points at
the end of the short rest by spending one or more
Hit Dice, each of those creatures regains an extra
1d6 hit points.
The extra hit points increase when you reach
certain levels in this class: to 1d8 at 9th level, to
1d10 at 13th level, and to 1d12 at 17th level.
Bard College
At 3rd level, you delve into the advanced techniques
of a bard college of your choice, such as the College
of Lore. Your choice grants you features at 3rd level
and again at 6th and 14th level.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 12

---

Expertise
At 3rd level, choose two of your skill proficiencies.
Your proficiency bonus is doubled for any ability
check you make that uses either of the chosen
proficiencies.
At 10th level, you can choose another two skill
proficiencies to gain this benefit.
Ability Score Improvement
When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th,
16th, and 19th level, you can increase one ability
score of your choice by 2, or you can increase two
ability scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you
can't increase an ability score above 20 using this
feature.
Font of Inspiration
Beginning when you reach 5th level, you regain all of
your expended uses of Bardic Inspiration when you
finish a short or long rest.
Countercharm
At 6th level, you gain the ability to use musical notes
or words of power to disrupt mind-influencing
effects. As an action, you can start a performance
that lasts until the end of your next turn. During that
time, you and any friendly creatures within 30 feet
of you have advantage on saving throws against
being frightened or charmed. A creature must be
able to hear you to gain this benefit. The
performance ends early if you are incapacitated or
silenced or if you voluntarily end it (no action
required).
Magical Secrets
By 10th level, you have plundered magical
knowledge from a wide spectrum of disciplines.
Choose two spells from any class, including this one.
A spell you choose must be of a level you can cast, as
shown on the Bard table, or a cantrip.
The chosen spells count as bard spells for you and
are included in the number in the Spells Known
column of the Bard table.
You learn two additional spells from any class at
14th level and again at 18th level.
Superior Inspiration
At 20th level, when you roll initiative and have no
uses of Bardic Inspiration left, you regain one use.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

College of Lore
Bards of the College of Lore know something about
most things, collecting bits of knowledge from
sources as diverse as scholarly tomes and peasant
tales. Whether singing folk ballads in taverns or
elaborate compositions in royal courts, these bards
use their gifts to hold audiences spellbound. When
the applause dies down, the audience members
might find themselves questioning everything they
held to be true, from their faith in the priesthood of
the local temple to their loyalty to the king.
The loyalty of these bards lies in the pursuit of
beauty and truth, not in fealty to a monarch or
following the tenets of a deity. A noble who keeps
such a bard as a herald or advisor knows that the
bard would rather be honest than politic.
The college's members gather in libraries and
sometimes in actual colleges, complete with
classrooms and dormitories, to share their lore with
one another. They also meet at festivals or affairs of
state, where they can expose corruption, unravel lies,
and poke fun at self-important figures of authority.
Bonus Proficiencies
When you join the College of Lore at 3rd level, you
gain proficiency with three skills of your choice.
Cutting Words
Also at 3rd level, you learn how to use your wit to
distract, confuse, and otherwise sap the confidence
and competence of others. When a creature that you
can see within 60 feet of you makes an attack roll, an
ability check, or a damage roll, you can use your
reaction to expend one of your uses of Bardic
Inspiration, rolling a Bardic Inspiration die and
subtracting the number rolled from the creature's
roll. You can choose to use this feature after the
creature makes its roll, but before the GM
determines whether the attack roll or ability check
succeeds or fails, or before the creature deals its
damage. The creature is immune if it can't hear you
or if it's immune to being charmed.
Additional Magical Secrets
At 6th level, you learn two spells of your choice from
any class. A spell you choose must be of a level you
can cast, as shown on the Bard table, or a cantrip.
The chosen spells count as bard spells for you but
don't count against the number of bard spells you
know.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 13

---

Peerless Skill
Starting at 14th level, when you make an ability
check, you can expend one use of Bardic Inspiration.
Roll a Bardic Inspiration die and add the number
rolled to your ability check. You can choose to do so
after you roll the die for the ability check, but before
the GM tells you whether you succeed or fail.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 14

---

Cleric
Class Features
As a cleric, you gain the following class features.
Hit Points
Hit Dice: 1d8 per cleric level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution
modifier
Hit Points at Higher Levels: 1d8 (or 5) + your
Constitution modifier per cleric level after 1st
Proficiencies
Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields
Weapons: Simple weapons
The Cleric
Proficiency
Level Bonus Features
1st +2 Spellcasting, Divine Domain
2nd +2 Channel Divinity (1/rest), Divine Domain
feature
3rd +2 
4th +2 Ability Score Improvement
5th +3 Destroy Undead (CR 1/2)
6th +3 Channel Divinity (2/rest), Divine Domain
feature
7th +3 
8th +3 Ability Score Improvement, Destroy Undead
(CR 1), Divine Domain feature
9th +4 
10th +4 Divine Intervention
11th +4 Destroy Undead (CR 2)
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement
13th +5 
14th +5 Destroy Undead (CR 3)
15th +5 
16th +5 Ability Score Improvement
17th +6 Destroy Undead (CR 4), Divine Domain
feature
18th +6 Channel Divinity (3/rest)
19th +6 Ability Score Improvement
20th +6 Divine Intervention improvement
Spellcasting
As a conduit for divine power, you can cast cleric
spells.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Tools: None
Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma
Skills: Choose two from History, Insight, Medicine,
Persuasion, and Religion
Equipment
You start with the following equipment, in addition
to the equipment granted by your background:
 (a) a mace or (b) a warhammer (if proficient)
 (a) scale mail, (b) leather armor, or (c) chain mail
(if proficient)
 (a) a light crossbow and 20 bolts or (b) any simple
weapon
 (a) a priest's pack or (b) an explorer's pack
 A shield and a holy symbol
Cantrips Spell Slots per Spell Level
Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
3 2 
3 3 
3 4 2 
4 4 3 
4 4 3 2 
4 4 3 3 
4 4 3 3 1 
4 4 3 3 2 
4 4 3 3 3 1 
5 4 3 3 3 2 
5 4 3 3 3 2 1 
5 4 3 3 3 2 1 
5 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 
5 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 
5 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 1 
5 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 1 
5 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 1 1
5 4 3 3 3 3 1 1 1 1
5 4 3 3 3 3 2 1 1 1
5 4 3 3 3 3 2 2 1 1
Cantrips
At 1st level, you know three cantrips of your choice
from the cleric spell list. You learn additional cleric
cantrips of your choice at higher levels, as shown in
the Cantrips Known column of the Cleric table.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 15

---

Preparing and Casting Spells
The Cleric table shows how many spell slots you
have to cast your spells of 1st level and higher. To
cast one of these spells, you must expend a slot of
the spell's level or higher. You regain all expended
spell slots when you finish a long rest.
You prepare the list of cleric spells that are
available for you to cast, choosing from the cleric
spell list. When you do so, choose a number of cleric
spells equal to your Wisdom modifier + your cleric
level (minimum of one spell). The spells must be of a
level for which you have spell slots.
For example, if you are a 3rd-level cleric, you have
four 1st-level and two 2nd-level spell slots. With a
Wisdom of 16, your list of prepared spells can
include six spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any
combination. If you prepare the 1st-level spell cure
wounds, you can cast it using a 1st-level or 2nd-level
slot. Casting the spell doesn't remove it from your
list of prepared spells.
You can change your list of prepared spells when
you finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of cleric
spells requires time spent in prayer and meditation:
at least 1 minute per spell level for each spell on
your list.
Spellcasting Ability
Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your cleric
spells. The power of your spells comes from your
devotion to your deity. You use your Wisdom
whenever a cleric spell refers to your spellcasting
ability. In addition, you use your Wisdom modifier
when setting the saving throw DC for a cleric spell
you cast and when making an attack roll with one.
Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus +
your Wisdom modifier
Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus +
your Wisdom modifier
Ritual Casting
You can cast a cleric spell as a ritual if that spell has
the ritual tag and you have the spell prepared.
Spellcasting Focus
You can use a holy symbol (see "Equipment") as a
spellcasting focus for your cleric spells.
Divine Domain
Choose one domain related to your deity, such as
Life. Each domain is detailed at the end of the class
description, and each one provides examples of gods
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

associated with it. Your choice grants you domain
spells and other features when you choose it at 1st
level. It also grants you additional ways to use
Channel Divinity when you gain that feature at 2nd
level, and additional benefits at 6th, 8th, and 17th
levels.
Domain Spells
Each domain has a list of spells-its domain spells-
that you gain at the cleric levels noted in the domain
description. Once you gain a domain spell, you
always have it prepared, and it doesn't count against
the number of spells you can prepare each day.
If you have a domain spell that doesn't appear on
the cleric spell list, the spell is nonetheless a cleric
spell for you.
Channel Divinity
At 2nd level, you gain the ability to channel divine
energy directly from your deity, using that energy to
fuel magical effects. You start with two such effects:
Turn Undead and an effect determined by your
domain. Some domains grant you additional effects
as you advance in levels, as noted in the domain
description.
When you use your Channel Divinity, you choose
which effect to create. You must then finish a short
or long rest to use your Channel Divinity again.
Some Channel Divinity effects require saving
throws. When you use such an effect from this class,
the DC equals your cleric spell save DC.
Beginning at 6th level, you can use your Channel
Divinity twice between rests, and beginning at 18th
level, you can use it three times between rests. When
you finish a short or long rest, you regain your
expended uses.
Channel Divinity: Turn Undead
As an action, you present your holy symbol and
speak a prayer censuring the undead. Each undead
that can see or hear you within 30 feet of you must
make a Wisdom saving throw. If the creature fails its
saving throw, it is turned for 1 minute or until it
takes any damage.
A turned creature must spend its turns trying to
move as far away from you as it can, and it can't
willingly move to a space within 30 feet of you. It
also can't take reactions. For its action, it can use
only the Dash action or try to escape from an effect
that prevents it from moving. If there's nowhere to
move, the creature can use the Dodge action.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 16

---

Ability Score Improvement
When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th,
16th, and 19th level, you can increase one ability
score of your choice by 2, or you can increase two
ability scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you
can't increase an ability score above 20 using this
feature.
Destroy Undead
Starting at 5th level, when an undead fails its saving
throw against your Turn Undead feature, the
creature is instantly destroyed if its challenge rating
is at or below a certain threshold, as shown in the
Destroy Undead table.
Destroy Undead
Cleric Level Destroys Undead of CR . . .
5th 1/2 or lower
8th 1 or lower
11th 2 or lower
14th 3 or lower
17th 4 or lower
Divine Intervention
Beginning at 10th level, you can call on your deity to
intervene on your behalf when your need is great.
Imploring your deity's aid requires you to use
your action. Describe the assistance you seek, and
roll percentile dice. If you roll a number equal to or
lower than your cleric level, your deity intervenes.
The GM chooses the nature of the intervention; the
effect of any cleric spell or cleric domain spell would
be appropriate.
If your deity intervenes, you can't use this feature
again for 7 days. Otherwise, you can use it again
after you finish a long rest.
At 20th level, your call for intervention succeeds
automatically, no roll required.
Life Domain
The Life domain focuses on the vibrant positive
energy-one of the fundamental forces of the
universe-that sustains all life. The gods of life
promote vitality and health through healing the sick
and wounded, caring for those in need, and driving
away the forces of death and undeath. Almost any
non-evil deity can claim influence over this domain,
particularly agricultural deities (such as Chauntea,
Arawai, and Demeter), sun gods (such as Lathander,
Pelor, and Re-Horakhty), gods of healing or
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

endurance (such as Ilmater, Mishakal, Apollo, and
Diancecht), and gods of home and community (such
as Hestia, Hathor, and Boldrei).
Life Domain Spells
Cleric Level Spells
1st bless, cure wounds
3rd lesser restoration, spiritual weapon
5th beacon of hope, revivify
7th death ward, guardian of faith
9th mass cure wounds, raise dead
Bonus Proficiency
When you choose this domain at 1st level, you gain
proficiency with heavy armor.
Disciple of Life
Also starting at 1st level, your healing spells are
more effective. Whenever you use a spell of 1st level
or higher to restore hit points to a creature, the
creature regains additional hit points equal to 2 +
the spell's level.
Channel Divinity: Preserve Life
Starting at 2nd level, you can use your Channel
Divinity to heal the badly injured.
As an action, you present your holy symbol and
evoke healing energy that can restore a number of
hit points equal to five times your cleric level.
Choose any creatures within 30 feet of you, and
divide those hit points among them. This feature can
restore a creature to no more than half of its hit
point maximum. You can't use this feature on an
undead or a construct.
Blessed Healer
Beginning at 6th level, the healing spells you cast on
others heal you as well. When you cast a spell of 1st
level or higher that restores hit points to a creature
other than you, you regain hit points equal to 2 + the
spell's level.
Divine Strike
At 8th level, you gain the ability to infuse your
weapon strikes with divine energy. Once on each of
your turns when you hit a creature with a weapon
attack, you can cause the attack to deal an extra 1d8
radiant damage to the target. When you reach 14th
level, the extra damage increases to 2d8.
Supreme Healing
Starting at 17th level, when you would normally roll
one or more dice to restore hit points with a spell,
you instead use the highest number possible for
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 17

---

each die. For example, instead of restoring 2d6 hit
points to a creature, you restore 12.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 18

---

Druid
Class Features
As a druid, you gain the following class features.
Hit Points
Hit Dice: 1d8 per druid level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution
modifier
Hit Points at Higher Levels: 1d8 (or 5) + your
Constitution modifier per druid level after 1st
Proficiencies
Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields (druids
will not wear armor or use shields made of metal)
The Druid
Proficiency
Level Bonus Features
1st +2 Druidic, Spellcasting
2nd +2 Wild Shape, Druid Circle
3rd +2 
4th +2 Wild Shape improvement, Ability Score
Improvement
5th +3 
6th +3 Druid Circle feature
7th +3 
8th +3 Wild Shape improvement, Ability Score
Improvement
9th +4 
10th +4 Druid Circle feature
11th +4 
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement
13th +5 
14th +5 Druid Circle feature
15th +5 
16th +5 Ability Score Improvement
17th +6 
18th +6 Timeless Body, Beast Spells
19th +6 Ability Score Improvement
20th +6 Archdruid
Druidic
You know Druidic, the secret language of druids. You
can speak the language and use it to leave hidden
messages. You and others who know this language
automatically spot such a message. Others spot the
message's presence with a successful DC 15 Wisdom
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Weapons: Clubs, daggers, darts, javelins, maces,
quarterstaffs, scimitars, sickles, slings, spears
Tools: Herbalism kit
Saving Throws: Intelligence, Wisdom
Skills: Choose two from Arcana, Animal Handling,
Insight, Medicine, Nature, Perception, Religion,
and Survival
Equipment
You start with the following equipment, in addition
to the equipment granted by your background:
 (a) a wooden shield or (b) any simple weapon
 (a) a scimitar or (b) any simple melee weapon
 Leather armor, an explorer's pack, and a druidic
focus
Cantrips Spell Slots per Spell Level
Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
2 2 
2 3 
2 4 2 
3 4 3 
3 4 3 2 
3 4 3 3 
3 4 3 3 1 
3 4 3 3 2 
3 4 3 3 3 1 
4 4 3 3 3 2 
4 4 3 3 3 2 1 
4 4 3 3 3 2 1 
4 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 
4 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 
4 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 1 
4 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 1 
4 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 1 1
4 4 3 3 3 3 1 1 1 1
4 4 3 3 3 3 2 1 1 1
4 4 3 3 3 3 2 2 1 1
(Perception) check but can't decipher it without
magic.
Spellcasting
Drawing on the divine essence of nature itself, you
can cast spells to shape that essence to your will.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 19

---

Cantrips
At 1st level, you know two cantrips of your choice
from the druid spell list. You learn additional druid
cantrips of your choice at higher levels, as shown in
the Cantrips Known column of the Druid table.
Preparing and Casting Spells
The Druid table shows how many spell slots you
have to cast your spells of 1st level and higher. To
cast one of these druid spells, you must expend a slot
of the spell's level or higher. You regain all expended
spell slots when you finish a long rest.
You prepare the list of druid spells that are
available for you to cast, choosing from the druid
spell list. When you do so, choose a number of druid
spells equal to your Wisdom modifier + your druid
level (minimum of one spell). The spells must be of a
level for which you have spell slots.
For example, if you are a 3rd-level druid, you have
four 1st-level and two 2nd-level spell slots. With a
Wisdom of 16, your list of prepared spells can
include six spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any
combination. If you prepare the 1st-level spell cure
wounds, you can cast it using a 1st-level or 2nd-level
slot. Casting the spell doesn't remove it from your
list of prepared spells.
You can also change your list of prepared spells
when you finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of
druid spells requires time spent in prayer and
meditation: at least 1 minute per spell level for each
spell on your list.
Spellcasting Ability
Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your druid
spells, since your magic draws upon your devotion
and attunement to nature. You use your Wisdom
whenever a spell refers to your spellcasting ability.
In addition, you use your Wisdom modifier when
setting the saving throw DC for a druid spell you cast
and when making an attack roll with one.
Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus +
your Wisdom modifier
Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus +
your Wisdom modifier
Ritual Casting
You can cast a druid spell as a ritual if that spell has
the ritual tag and you have the spell prepared.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Spellcasting Focus
You can use a druidic focus (see "Equipment") as a
spellcasting focus for your druid spells.
Wild Shape
Starting at 2nd level, you can use your action to
magically assume the shape of a beast that you have
seen before. You can use this feature twice. You
regain expended uses when you finish a short or
long rest.
Your druid level determines the beasts you can
transform into, as shown in the Beast Shapes table.
At 2nd level, for example, you can transform into any
beast that has a challenge rating of 1/4 or lower that
doesn't have a flying or swimming speed.
Beast Shapes
Max.
Level CR Limitations Example
2nd 1/4 No flying or swimming Wolf
speed
4th 1/2 No flying speed Crocodile
8th 1 - Giant
eagle
You can stay in a beast shape for a number of
hours equal to half your druid level (rounded down).
You then revert to your normal form unless you
expend another use of this feature. You can revert to
your normal form earlier by using a bonus action on
your turn. You automatically revert if you fall
unconscious, drop to 0 hit points, or die.
While you are transformed, the following rules
apply:
 Your game statistics are replaced by the statistics
of the beast, but you retain your alignment,
personality, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and
Charisma scores. You also retain all of your skill
and saving throw proficiencies, in addition to
gaining those of the creature. If the creature has
the same proficiency as you and the bonus in its
stat block is higher than yours, use the creature's
bonus instead of yours. If the creature has any
legendary or lair actions, you can't use them.
 When you transform, you assume the beast's hit
points and Hit Dice. When you revert to your
normal form, you return to the number of hit
points you had before you transformed. However,
if you revert as a result of dropping to 0 hit points,
any excess damage carries over to your normal
form. For example, if you take 10 damage in
animal form and have only 1 hit point left, you
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 20

---

revert and take 9 damage. As long as the excess
damage doesn't reduce your normal form to 0 hit
points, you aren't knocked unconscious.
 You can't cast spells, and your ability to speak or
take any action that requires hands is limited to
the capabilities of your beast form. Transforming
doesn't break your concentration on a spell you've
already cast, however, or prevent you from taking
actions that are part of a spell, such as call
lightning, that you've already cast.
 You retain the benefit of any features from your
class, race, or other source and can use them if the
new form is physically capable of doing so.
However, you can't use any of your special senses,
such as darkvision, unless your new form also has
that sense.
 You choose whether your equipment falls to the
ground in your space, merges into your new form,
or is worn by it. Worn equipment functions as
normal, but the GM decides whether it is practical
for the new form to wear a piece of equipment,
based on the creature's shape and size. Your
equipment doesn't change size or shape to match
the new form, and any equipment that the new
form can't wear must either fall to the ground or
merge with it. Equipment that merges with the
form has no effect until you leave the form.
Druid Circle
At 2nd level, you choose to identify with a circle of
druids, such as the Circle of the Land. Your choice
grants you features at 2nd level and again at 6th,
10th, and 14th level.
Ability Score Improvement
When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th,
16th, and 19th level, you can increase one ability
score of your choice by 2, or you can increase two
ability scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you
can't increase an ability score above 20 using this
feature.
Timeless Body
Starting at 18th level, the primal magic that you
wield causes you to age more slowly. For every 10
years that pass, your body ages only 1 year.
Beast Spells
Beginning at 18th level, you can cast many of your
druid spells in any shape you assume using Wild
Shape. You can perform the somatic and verbal
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

components of a druid spell while in a beast shape,
but you aren't able to provide material components.
Archdruid
At 20th level, you can use your Wild Shape an
unlimited number of times.
Additionally, you can ignore the verbal and
somatic components of your druid spells, as well as
any material components that lack a cost and aren't
consumed by a spell. You gain this benefit in both
your normal shape and your beast shape from Wild
Shape.
Circle of the Land
The Circle of the Land is made up of mystics and
sages who safeguard ancient knowledge and rites
through a vast oral tradition. These druids meet
within sacred circles of trees or standing stones to
whisper primal secrets in Druidic. The circle's wisest
members preside as the chief priests of communities
that hold to the Old Faith and serve as advisors to
the rulers of those folk. As a member of this circle,
your magic is influenced by the land where you were
initiated into the circle's mysterious rites.
Bonus Cantrip
When you choose this circle at 2nd level, you learn
one additional druid cantrip of your choice.
Natural Recovery
Starting at 2nd level, you can regain some of your
magical energy by sitting in meditation and
communing with nature. During a short rest, you
choose expended spell slots to recover. The spell
slots can have a combined level that is equal to or
less than half your druid level (rounded up), and
none of the slots can be 6th level or higher. You can't
use this feature again until you finish a long rest.
For example, when you are a 4th-level druid, you
can recover up to two levels worth of spell slots. You
can recover either a 2nd-level slot or two 1st-level
slots.
Circle Spells
Your mystical connection to the land infuses you
with the ability to cast certain spells. At 3rd, 5th, 7th,
and 9th level you gain access to circle spells
connected to the land where you became a druid.
Choose that land-arctic, coast, desert, forest,
grassland, mountain, or swamp-and consult the
associated list of spells.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 21

---

Once you gain access to a circle spell, you always
have it prepared, and it doesn't count against the
number of spells you can prepare each day. If you
gain access to a spell that doesn't appear on the
druid spell list, the spell is nonetheless a druid spell
for you.
Arctic
Druid Level Circle Spells
3rd hold person, spike growth
5th sleet storm, slow
7th freedom of movement, ice storm
9th commune with nature, cone of cold
Coast
Druid Level Circle Spells
3rd mirror image, misty step
5th water breathing, water walk
7th control water, freedom of movement
9th conjure elemental, scrying
Desert
Druid Level Circle Spells
3rd blur, silence
5th create food and water, protection from
energy
7th blight, hallucinatory terrain
9th insect plague, wall of stone
Forest
Druid Level Circle Spells
3rd barkskin, spider climb
5th call lightning, plant growth
7th divination, freedom of movement
9th commune with nature, tree stride
Grassland
Druid Level Circle Spells
3rd invisibility, pass without trace
5th daylight, haste
7th divination, freedom of movement
9th dream, insect plague
Mountain
Druid Level Circle Spells
3rd spider climb, spike growth
5th lightning bolt, meld into stone
7th stone shape, stoneskin
9th passwall, wall of stone
Swamp
Druid Level Circle Spells
3rd acid arrow, darkness
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

5th water walk, stinking cloud
7th freedom of movement, locate creature
9th insect plague, scrying
Land's Stride
Starting at 6th level, moving through nonmagical
difficult terrain costs you no extra movement. You
can also pass through nonmagical plants without
being slowed by them and without taking damage
from them if they have thorns, spines, or a similar
hazard.
In addition, you have advantage on saving throws
against plants that are magically created or
manipulated to impede movement, such those
created by the entangle spell.
Nature's Ward
When you reach 10th level, you can't be charmed or
frightened by elementals or fey, and you are immune
to poison and disease.
Nature's Sanctuary
When you reach 14th level, creatures of the natural
world sense your connection to nature and become
hesitant to attack you. When a beast or plant
creature attacks you, that creature must make a
Wisdom saving throw against your druid spell save
DC. On a failed save, the creature must choose a
different target, or the attack automatically misses.
On a successful save, the creature is immune to this
effect for 24 hours.
The creature is aware of this effect before it makes
its attack against you.
Sacred Plants and Wood
A druid holds certain plants to be sacred, particularly alder,
ash, birch, elder, hazel, holly, juniper, mistletoe, oak, rowan,
willow, and yew. Druids often use such plants as part of a
spellcasting focus, incorporating lengths of oak or yew or
sprigs of mistletoe.
Similarly, a druid uses such woods to make other objects,
such as weapons and shields. Yew is associated with death
and rebirth, so weapon handles for scimitars or sickles might
be fashioned from it. Ash is associated with life and oak with
strength. These woods make excellent hafts or whole
weapons, such as clubs or quarterstaffs, as well as shields.
Alder is associated with air, and it might be used for thrown
weapons, such as darts or javelins.
Druids from regions that lack the plants described here
have chosen other plants to take on similar uses. For
instance, a druid of a desert region might value the yucca
tree and cactus plants.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 22

---

Druids and the Gods
Some druids venerate the forces of nature themselves, but
most druids are devoted to one of the many nature deities
worshiped in the multiverse (the lists of gods in appendix PH-
B include many such deities). The worship of these deities is
often considered a more ancient tradition than the faiths of
clerics and urbanized peoples.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 23

---

Fighter
Class Features
As a fighter, you gain the following class features.
Hit Points
Hit Dice: 1d10 per fighter level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 10 + your Constitution
modifier
Hit Points at Higher Levels: 1d10 (or 6) + your
Constitution modifier per fighter level after 1st
Proficiencies
Armor: All armor, shields
Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Strength, Constitution
Skills: Choose two skills from Acrobatics, Animal
Handling, Athletics, History, Insight, Intimidation,
Perception, and Survival
Equipment
You start with the following equipment, in addition
to the equipment granted by your background:
 (a) chain mail or (b) leather armor, longbow, and
20 arrows
 (a) a martial weapon and a shield or (b) two
martial weapons
 (a) a light crossbow and 20 bolts or (b) two
handaxes
 (a) a dungeoneer's pack or (b) an explorer's pack
The Fighter
Proficiency
Level Bonus Features
1st +2 Fighting Style, Second Wind
2nd +2 Action Surge (one use)
3rd +2 Martial Archetype
4th +2 Ability Score Improvement
5th +3 Extra Attack
6th +3 Ability Score Improvement
7th +3 Martial Archetype feature
8th +3 Ability Score Improvement
9th +4 Indomitable (one use)
10th +4 Martial Archetype feature
11th +4 Extra Attack (2)
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement
13th +5 Indomitable (two uses)
14th +5 Ability Score Improvement
15th +5 Martial Archetype feature
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

16th +5 Ability Score Improvement
17th +6 Action Surge (two uses),
Indomitable (three uses)
18th +6 Martial Archetype feature
19th +6 Ability Score Improvement
20th +6 Extra Attack (3)
Fighting Style
You adopt a particular style of fighting as your
specialty. Choose one of the following options. You
can't take a Fighting Style option more than once,
even if you later get to choose again.
Archery
You gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls you make with
ranged weapons.
Defense
While you are wearing armor, you gain a +1 bonus to
AC.
Dueling
When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand
and no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to
damage rolls with that weapon.
Great Weapon Fighting
When you roll a 1 or 2 on a damage die for an attack
you make with a melee weapon that you are
wielding with two hands, you can reroll the die and
must use the new roll, even if the new roll is a 1 or a
2. The weapon must have the two-handed or
versatile property for you to gain this benefit.
Protection
When a creature you can see attacks a target other
than you that is within 5 feet of you, you can use
your reaction to impose disadvantage on the attack
roll. You must be wielding a shield.
Two-Weapon Fighting
When you engage in two-weapon fighting, you can
add your ability modifier to the damage of the
second attack.
Second Wind
You have a limited well of stamina that you can draw
on to protect yourself from harm. On your turn, you
can use a bonus action to regain hit points equal to
1d10 + your fighter level. Once you use this feature,
you must finish a short or long rest before you can
use it again.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 24

---

Action Surge
Starting at 2nd level, you can push yourself beyond
your normal limits for a moment. On your turn, you
can take one additional action on top of your regular
action and a possible bonus action.
Once you use this feature, you must finish a short
or long rest before you can use it again. Starting at
17th level, you can use it twice before a rest, but only
once on the same turn.
Martial Archetype
At 3rd level, you choose an archetype that you strive
to emulate in your combat styles and techniques,
such as Champion. The archetype you choose grants
you features at 3rd level and again at 7th, 10th, 15th,
and 18th level.
Ability Score Improvement
When you reach 4th level, and again at 6th, 8th, 12th,
14th, 16th, and 19th level, you can increase one
ability score of your choice by 2, or you can increase
two ability scores of your choice by 1. As normal,
you can't increase an ability score above 20 using
this feature.
Extra Attack
Beginning at 5th level, you can attack twice, instead
of once, whenever you take the Attack action on your
turn.
The number of attacks increases to three when
you reach 11th level in this class and to four when
you reach 20th level in this class.
Indomitable
Beginning at 9th level, you can reroll a saving throw
that you fail. If you do so, you must use the new roll,
and you can't use this feature again until you finish a
long rest.
You can use this feature twice between long rests
starting at 13th level and three times between long
rests starting at 17th level.
Martial Archetypes
Different fighters choose different approaches to
perfecting their fighting prowess. The martial
archetype you choose to emulate reflects your
approach.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Champion
The archetypal Champion focuses on the
development of raw physical power honed to deadly
perfection. Those who model themselves on this
archetype combine rigorous training with physical
excellence to deal devastating blows.
Improved Critical
Beginning when you choose this archetype at 3rd
level, your weapon attacks score a critical hit on a
roll of 19 or 20.
Remarkable Athlete
Starting at 7th level, you can add half your
proficiency bonus (round up) to any Strength,
Dexterity, or Constitution check you make that
doesn't already use your proficiency bonus.
In addition, when you make a running long jump,
the distance you can cover increases by a number of
feet equal to your Strength modifier.
Additional Fighting Style
At 10th level, you can choose a second option from
the Fighting Style class feature.
Superior Critical
Starting at 15th level, your weapon attacks score a
critical hit on a roll of 18-20.
Survivor
At 18th level, you attain the pinnacle of resilience in
battle. At the start of each of your turns, you regain
hit points equal to 5 + your Constitution modifier if
you have no more than half of your hit points left.
You don't gain this benefit if you have 0 hit points.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 25

---

Monk
Class Features
As a monk, you gain the following class features.
Hit Points
Hit Dice: 1d8 per monk level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution
modifier
Hit Points at Higher Levels: 1d8 (or 5) + your
Constitution modifier per monk level after 1st
Proficiencies
Armor: None
The Monk
Level Proficiency Bonus Martial Arts Ki Points Unarmored
1st +2 1d4 - -
2nd +2 1d4 2 +10
3rd +2 1d4 3 +10
4th +2 1d4 4 +10
5th +3 1d6 5 +10
6th +3 1d6 6 +15
7th +3 1d6 7 +15
8th +3 1d6 8 +15
9th +4 1d6 9 +15
10th +4 1d6 10 +20
11th +4 1d8 11 +20
12th +4 1d8 12 +20
13th +5 1d8 13 +20
14th +5 1d8 14 +25
15th +5 1d8 15 +25
16th +5 1d8 16 +25
17th +6 1d10 17 +25
18th +6 1d10 18 +30
19th +6 1d10 19 +30
20th +6 1d10 20 +30
Unarmored Defense
Beginning at 1st level, while you are wearing no
armor and not wielding a shield, your AC equals 10 +
your Dexterity modifier + your Wisdom modifier.
Martial Arts
At 1st level, your practice of martial arts gives you
mastery of combat styles that use unarmed strikes
and monk weapons, which are shortswords and any
simple melee weapons that don't have the two-
handed or heavy property.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Weapons: Simple weapons, shortswords
Tools: Choose one type of artisan's tools or one
musical instrument
Saving Throws: Strength, Dexterity
Skills: Choose two from Acrobatics, Athletics,
History, Insight, Religion, and Stealth
Equipment
You start with the following equipment, in addition
to the equipment granted by your background:
 (a) a shortsword or (b) any simple weapon
 (a) a dungeoneer's pack or (b) an explorer's pack
 10 darts
d Movement Features
- Unarmored Defense, Martial Arts
0 ft. Ki, Unarmored Movement
0 ft. Monastic Tradition, Deflect Missiles
0 ft. Ability Score Improvement, Slow Fall
0 ft. Extra Attack, Stunning Strike
5 ft. Ki-Empowered Strikes, Monastic Tradition feature
5 ft. Evasion, Stillness of Mind
5 ft. Ability Score Improvement
5 ft. Unarmored Movement improvement
0 ft. Purity of Body
0 ft. Monastic Tradition feature
0 ft. Ability Score Improvement
0 ft. Tongue of the Sun and Moon
5 ft. Diamond Soul
5 ft. Timeless Body
5 ft. Ability Score Improvement
5 ft. Monastic Tradition feature
0 ft. Empty Body
0 ft. Ability Score Improvement
0 ft. Perfect Self
You gain the following benefits while you are
unarmed or wielding only monk weapons and you
aren't wearing armor or wielding a shield:
 You can use Dexterity instead of Strength for the
attack and damage rolls of your unarmed strikes
and monk weapons.
 You can roll a d4 in place of the normal damage of
your unarmed strike or monk weapon. This die
changes as you gain monk levels, as shown in the
Martial Arts column of the Monk table.
 When you use the Attack action with an unarmed
strike or a monk weapon on your turn, you can
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 26

---

make one unarmed strike as a bonus action. For
example, if you take the Attack action and attack
with a quarterstaff, you can also make an unarmed
strike as a bonus action, assuming you haven't
already taken a bonus action this turn.
Certain monasteries use specialized forms of the
monk weapons. For example, you might use a club
that is two lengths of wood connected by a short
chain (called a nunchaku) or a sickle with a shorter,
straighter blade (called a kama). Whatever name you
use for a monk weapon, you can use the game
statistics provided for the weapon.
Ki
Starting at 2nd level, your training allows you to
harness the mystic energy of ki. Your access to this
energy is represented by a number of ki points. Your
monk level determines the number of points you
have, as shown in the Ki Points column of the Monk
table.
You can spend these points to fuel various ki
features. You start knowing three such features:
Flurry of Blows, Patient Defense, and Step of the
Wind. You learn more ki features as you gain levels
in this class.
When you spend a ki point, it is unavailable until
you finish a short or long rest, at the end of which
you draw all of your expended ki back into yourself.
You must spend at least 30 minutes of the rest
meditating to regain your ki points.
Some of your ki features require your target to
make a saving throw to resist the feature's effects.
The saving throw DC is calculated as follows:
Ki save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus +
your Wisdom modifier
Flurry of Blows
Immediately after you take the Attack action on your
turn, you can spend 1 ki point to make two unarmed
strikes as a bonus action.
Patient Defense
You can spend 1 ki point to take the Dodge action as
a bonus action on your turn.
Step of the Wind
You can spend 1 ki point to take the Disengage or
Dash action as a bonus action on your turn, and your
jump distance is doubled for the turn.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Unarmored Movement
Starting at 2nd level, your speed increases by 10 feet
while you are not wearing armor or wielding a
shield. This bonus increases when you reach certain
monk levels, as shown in the Monk table.
At 9th level, you gain the ability to move along
vertical surfaces and across liquids on your turn
without falling during the move.
Monastic Tradition
When you reach 3rd level, you commit yourself to a
monastic tradition, such as the Way of the Open
Hand. Your tradition grants you features at 3rd level
and again at 6th, 11th, and 17th level.
Deflect Missiles
Starting at 3rd level, you can use your reaction to
deflect or catch the missile when you are hit by a
ranged weapon attack. When you do so, the damage
you take from the attack is reduced by 1d10 + your
Dexterity modifier + your monk level.
If you reduce the damage to 0, you can catch the
missile if it is small enough for you to hold in one
hand and you have at least one hand free. If you
catch a missile in this way, you can spend 1 ki point
to make a ranged attack with the weapon or piece of
ammunition you just caught, as part of the same
reaction. You make this attack with proficiency,
regardless of your weapon proficiencies, and the
missile counts as a monk weapon for the attack,
which has a normal range of 20 feet and a long range
of 60 feet.
Ability Score Improvement
When you reach 4th level, and again at 8th, 12th,
16th, and 19th level, you can increase one ability
score of your choice by 2, or you can increase two
ability scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you
can't increase an ability score above 20 using this
feature.
Slow Fall
Beginning at 4th level, you can use your reaction
when you fall to reduce any falling damage you take
by an amount equal to five times your monk level.
Extra Attack
Beginning at 5th level, you can attack twice, instead
of once, whenever you take the Attack action on your
turn.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 27

---

Stunning Strike
Starting at 5th level, you can interfere with the flow
of ki in an opponent's body. When you hit another
creature with a melee weapon attack, you can spend
1 ki point to attempt a stunning strike. The target
must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or be
stunned until the end of your next turn.
Ki-Empowered Strikes
Starting at 6th level, your unarmed strikes count as
magical for the purpose of overcoming resistance
and immunity to nonmagical attacks and damage.
Evasion
At 7th level, your instinctive agility lets you dodge
out of the way of certain area effects, such as a blue
dragon's lightning breath or a fireball spell. When
you are subjected to an effect that allows you to
make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half
damage, you instead take no damage if you succeed
on the saving throw, and only half damage if you fail.
Stillness of Mind
Starting at 7th level, you can use your action to end
one effect on yourself that is causing you to be
charmed or frightened.
Purity of Body
At 10th level, your mastery of the ki flowing through
you makes you immune to disease and poison.
Tongue of the Sun and Moon
Starting at 13th level, you learn to touch the ki of
other minds so that you understand all spoken
languages. Moreover, any creature that can
understand a language can understand what you say.
Diamond Soul
Beginning at 14th level, your mastery of ki grants
you proficiency in all saving throws.
Additionally, whenever you make a saving throw
and fail, you can spend 1 ki point to reroll it and take
the second result.
Timeless Body
At 15th level, your ki sustains you so that you suffer
none of the frailty of old age, and you can't be aged
magically. You can still die of old age, however. In
addition, you no longer need food or water.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Empty Body
Beginning at 18th level, you can use your action to
spend 4 ki points to become invisible for 1 minute.
During that time, you also have resistance to all
damage but force damage.
Additionally, you can spend 8 ki points to cast the
astral projection spell, without needing material
components. When you do so, you can't take any
other creatures with you.
Perfect Self
At 20th level, when you roll for initiative and have
no ki points remaining, you regain 4 ki points.
Monastic Traditions
Three traditions of monastic pursuit are common in
the monasteries scattered across the multiverse.
Most monasteries practice one tradition exclusively,
but a few honor the three traditions and instruct
each monk according to his or her aptitude and
interest. All three traditions rely on the same basic
techniques, diverging as the student grows more
adept. Thus, a monk need choose a tradition only
upon reaching 3rd level.
Way of the Open Hand
Monks of the Way of the Open Hand are the ultimate
masters of martial arts combat, whether armed or
unarmed. They learn techniques to push and trip
their opponents, manipulate ki to heal damage to
their bodies, and practice advanced meditation that
can protect them from harm.
Open Hand Technique
Starting when you choose this tradition at 3rd level,
you can manipulate your enemy's ki when you
harness your own. Whenever you hit a creature with
one of the attacks granted by your Flurry of Blows,
you can impose one of the following effects on that
target:
 It must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or be
knocked prone.
 It must make a Strength saving throw. If it fails,
you can push it up to 15 feet away from you.
 It can't take reactions until the end of your next
turn.
Wholeness of Body
At 6th level, you gain the ability to heal yourself. As
an action, you can regain hit points equal to three
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 28

---

times your monk level. You must finish a long rest
before you can use this feature again.
Tranquility
Beginning at 11th level, you can enter a special
meditation that surrounds you with an aura of peace.
At the end of a long rest, you gain the effect of a
sanctuary spell that lasts until the start of your next
long rest (the spell can end early as normal). The
saving throw DC for the spell equals 8 + your
Wisdom modifier + your proficiency bonus.
Quivering Palm
At 17th level, you gain the ability to set up lethal
vibrations in someone's body. When you hit a
creature with an unarmed strike, you can spend 3 ki
points to start these imperceptible vibrations, which
last for a number of days equal to your monk level.
The vibrations are harmless unless you use your
action to end them. To do so, you and the target
must be on the same plane of existence. When you
use this action, the creature must make a
Constitution saving throw. If it fails, it is reduced to 0
hit points. If it succeeds, it takes 10d10 necrotic
damage.
You can have only one creature under the effect of
this feature at a time. You can choose to end the
vibrations harmlessly without using an action.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 29

---

Paladin
Class Features
As a paladin, you gain the following class features.
Hit Points
Hit Dice: 1d10 per paladin level
Hit Points at 1st Level: 10 + your Constitution
modifier
Hit Points at Higher Levels: 1d10 (or 6) + your
Constitution modifier per paladin level after 1st
Proficiencies
Armor: All armor, shields
The Paladin
Proficiency 
Level Bonus Features 1s
1st +2 Divine Sense, Lay on Hands 
2nd +2 Fighting Style, Spellcasting, Divine Smite 2
3rd +2 Divine Health, Sacred Oath 3
4th +2 Ability Score Improvement 3
5th +3 Extra Attack 4
6th +3 Aura of Protection 4
7th +3 Sacred Oath feature 4
8th +3 Ability Score Improvement 4
9th +4 4
10th +4 Aura of Courage 4
11th +4 Improved Divine Smite 4
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement 4
13th +5 4
14th +5 Cleansing Touch 4
15th +5 Sacred Oath feature 4
16th +5 Ability Score Improvement 4
17th +6 4
18th +6 Aura improvements 4
19th +6 Ability Score Improvement 4
20th +6 Sacred Oath feature 4
Divine Sense
The presence of strong evil registers on your senses
like a noxious odor, and powerful good rings like
heavenly music in your ears. As an action, you can
open your awareness to detect such forces. Until the
end of your next turn, you know the location of any
celestial, fiend, or undead within 60 feet of you that
is not behind total cover. You know the type
(celestial, fiend, or undead) of any being whose
presence you sense, but not its identity (the vampire
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma
Skills: Choose two from Athletics, Insight,
Intimidation, Medicine, Persuasion, and Religion
Equipment
You start with the following equipment, in addition
to the equipment granted by your background:
 (a) a martial weapon and a shield or (b) two
martial weapons
 (a) five javelins or (b) any simple melee weapon
 (a) a priest's pack or (b) an explorer's pack
 Chain mail and a holy symbol
Spell Slots per Spell Level
st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
 
 
 
 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 2 
3 2 
3 3 
3 3 
3 3 1 
3 3 1 
3 3 2 
3 3 2 
3 3 3 1
3 3 3 1
3 3 3 2
3 3 3 2
Count Strahd von Zarovich, for instance). Within the
same radius, you also detect the presence of any
place or object that has been consecrated or
desecrated, as with the hallow spell.
You can use this feature a number of times equal
to 1 + your Charisma modifier. When you finish a
long rest, you regain all expended uses.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 30

---

Lay on Hands
Your blessed touch can heal wounds. You have a
pool of healing power that replenishes when you
take a long rest. With that pool, you can restore a
total number of hit points equal to your paladin level
x 5.
As an action, you can touch a creature and draw
power from the pool to restore a number of hit
points to that creature, up to the maximum amount
remaining in your pool.
Alternatively, you can expend 5 hit points from
your pool of healing to cure the target of one disease
or neutralize one poison affecting it. You can cure
multiple diseases and neutralize multiple poisons
with a single use of Lay on Hands, expending hit
points separately for each one.
This feature has no effect on undead and
constructs.
Fighting Style
At 2nd level, you adopt a style of fighting as your
specialty. Choose one of the following options. You
can't take a Fighting Style option more than once,
even if you later get to choose again.
Defense
While you are wearing armor, you gain a +1 bonus to
AC.
Dueling
When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand
and no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to
damage rolls with that weapon.
Great Weapon Fighting
When you roll a 1 or 2 on a damage die for an attack
you make with a melee weapon that you are
wielding with two hands, you can reroll the die and
must use the new roll. The weapon must have the
two-handed or versatile property for you to gain this
benefit.
Protection
When a creature you can see attacks a target other
than you that is within 5 feet of you, you can use
your reaction to impose disadvantage on the attack
roll. You must be wielding a shield.
Spellcasting
By 2nd level, you have learned to draw on divine
magic through meditation and prayer to cast spells
as a cleric does.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Preparing and Casting Spells
The Paladin table shows how many spell slots you
have to cast your spells. To cast one of your paladin
spells of 1st level or higher, you must expend a slot
of the spell's level or higher. You regain all expended
spell slots when you finish a long rest.
You prepare the list of paladin spells that are
available for you to cast, choosing from the paladin
spell list. When you do so, choose a number of
paladin spells equal to your Charisma modifier + half
your paladin level, rounded down (minimum of one
spell). The spells must be of a level for which you
have spell slots.
For example, if you are a 5th-level paladin, you
have four 1st-level and two 2nd-level spell slots.
With a Charisma of 14, your list of prepared spells
can include four spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any
combination. If you prepare the 1st-level spell cure
wounds, you can cast it using a 1st-level or a 2nd-
level slot. Casting the spell doesn't remove it from
your list of prepared spells.
You can change your list of prepared spells when
you finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of paladin
spells requires time spent in prayer and meditation:
at least 1 minute per spell level for each spell on
your list.
Spellcasting Ability
Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your paladin
spells, since their power derives from the strength of
your convictions. You use your Charisma whenever a
spell refers to your spellcasting ability. In addition,
you use your Charisma modifier when setting the
saving throw DC for a paladin spell you cast and
when making an attack roll with one.
Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus +
your Charisma modifier
Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus +
your Charisma modifier
Spellcasting Focus
You can use a holy symbol as a spellcasting focus for
your paladin spells.
Divine Smite
Starting at 2nd level, when you hit a creature with a
melee weapon attack, you can expend one spell slot
to deal radiant damage to the target, in addition to
the weapon's damage. The extra damage is 2d8 for a
1st-level spell slot, plus 1d8 for each spell level
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 31

---

higher than 1st, to a maximum of 5d8. The damage
increases by 1d8 if the target is an undead or a fiend.
Divine Health
By 3rd level, the divine magic flowing through you
makes you immune to 
...[truncated]

## Using Ability Scores

Using Ability Scores").
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

In addition, most backgrounds give a character
proficiency with one or more tools (detailed in
"Equipment").
If a character would gain the same proficiency
from two different sources, he or she can choose a
different proficiency of the same kind (skill or tool)
instead.
Languages
Some backgrounds also allow characters to learn
additional languages beyond those given by race. See
"Languages."
Equipment
Each background provides a package of starting
equipment. If you use the optional rule to spend coin
on gear, you do not receive the starting equipment
from your background.
Suggested Characteristics
A background contains suggested personal
characteristics based on your background. You can
pick characteristics, roll dice to determine them
randomly, or use the suggestions as inspiration for
characteristics of your own creation.
Customizing a Background
You might want to tweak some of the features of a
background so it better fits your character or the
campaign setting. To customize a background, you
can replace one feature with any other one, choose
any two skills, and choose a total of two tool
proficiencies or languages from the sample
backgrounds. You can either use the equipment
package from your background or spend coin on
gear as described in the equipment section. (If you
spend coin, you can't also take the equipment
package suggested for your class.) Finally, choose
two personality traits, one ideal, one bond, and one
flaw. If you can't find a feature that matches your
desired background, work with your GM to create
one.
Acolyte
You have spent your life in the service of a temple to
a specific god or pantheon of gods. You act as an
intermediary between the realm of the holy and the
mortal world, performing sacred rites and offering
sacrifices in order to conduct worshipers into the
presence of the divine. You are not necessarily a
cleric-performing sacred rites is not the same thing
as channeling divine power.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 60

---

Choose a god, a pantheon of gods, or some other
quasi-divine being from among those listed in
"Fantasy-Historical Pantheons" or those specified by
your GM, and work with your GM to detail the nature
of your religious service. Were you a lesser
functionary in a temple, raised from childhood to
assist the priests in the sacred rites? Or were you a
high priest who suddenly experienced a call to serve
your god in a different way? Perhaps you were the
leader of a small cult outside of any established
temple structure, or even an occult group that
served a fiendish master that you now deny.
Skill Proficiencies: Insight, Religion
Languages: Two of your choice
Equipment: A holy symbol (a gift to you when you
entered the priesthood), a prayer book or prayer
wheel, 5 sticks of incense, vestments, a set of
common clothes, and a pouch containing 15 gp
Feature: Shelter of the Faithful
As an acolyte, you command the respect of those
who share your faith, and you can perform the
religious ceremonies of your deity. You and your
adventuring companions can expect to receive free
healing and care at a temple, shrine, or other
established presence of your faith, though you must
provide any material components needed for spells.
Those who share your religion will support you (but
only you) at a modest lifestyle.
You might also have ties to a specific temple
dedicated to your chosen deity or pantheon, and you
have a residence there. This could be the temple
where you used to serve, if you remain on good
terms with it, or a temple where you have found a
new home. While near your temple, you can call
upon the priests for assistance, provided the
assistance you ask for is not hazardous and you
remain in good standing with your temple.
Suggested Characteristics
Acolytes are shaped by their experience in temples
or other religious communities. Their study of the
history and tenets of their faith and their
relationships to temples, shrines, or hierarchies
affect their mannerisms and ideals. Their flaws
might be some hidden hypocrisy or heretical idea, or
an ideal or bond taken to an extreme.
d8 Personality Trait
1 I idolize a particular hero of my faith, and constantly
refer to that person's deeds and example.
2 I can find common ground between the fiercest
enemies, empathizing with them and always
working toward peace.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

3 I see omens in every event and action. The gods try
to speak to us, we just need to listen
4 Nothing can shake my optimistic attitude.
5 I quote (or misquote) sacred texts and proverbs in
almost every situation.
6 I am tolerant (or intolerant) of other faiths and
respect (or condemn) the worship of other gods.
7 I've enjoyed fine food, drink, and high society
among my temple's elite. Rough living grates on me.
8 I've spent so long in the temple that I have little
practical experience dealing with people in the
outside world.
d6 Ideal
1 Tradition. The ancient traditions of worship and
sacrifice must be preserved and upheld. (Lawful)
2 Charity. I always try to help those in need, no matter
what the personal cost. (Good)
3 Change. We must help bring about the changes the
gods are constantly working in the world. (Chaotic)
4 Power. I hope to one day rise to the top of my faith's
religious hierarchy. (Lawful)
5 Faith. I trust that my deity will guide my actions. I
have faith that if I work hard, things will go well.
(Lawful)
6 Aspiration. I seek to prove myself worthy of my
god's favor by matching my actions against his or
her teachings. (Any)
d6 Bond
1 I would die to recover an ancient relic of my faith
that was lost long ago.
2 I will someday get revenge on the corrupt temple
hierarchy who branded me a heretic.
3 I owe my life to the priest who took me in when my
parents died.
4 Everything I do is for the common people.
5 I will do anything to protect the temple where I
served.
6 I seek to preserve a sacred text that my enemies
consider heretical and seek to destroy.
d6 Flaw
1 I judge others harshly, and myself even more
severely.
2 I put too much trust in those who wield power
within my temple's hierarchy.
3 My piety sometimes leads me to blindly trust those
that profess faith in my god.
4 I am inflexible in my thinking.
5 I am suspicious of strangers and expect the worst of
them.
6 Once I pick a goal, I become obsessed with it to the
detriment of everything else in my life.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 61

---

Equipment
Common coins come in several different
denominations based on the relative worth of the
metal from which they are made. The three most
common coins are the gold piece (gp), the silver
piece (sp), and the copper piece (cp).
With one gold piece, a character can buy a bedroll,
50 feet of good rope, or a goat. A skilled (but not
exceptional) artisan can earn one gold piece a day.
The gold piece is the standard unit of measure for
wealth, even if the coin itself is not commonly used.
When merchants discuss deals that involve goods or
services worth hundreds or thousands of gold pieces,
the transactions don't usually involve the exchange
of individual coins. Rather, the gold piece is a
standard measure of value, and the actual exchange
is in gold bars, letters of credit, or valuable goods.
One gold piece is worth ten silver pieces, the most
prevalent coin among commoners. A silver piece
buys a laborer's work for half a day, a flask of lamp
oil, or a night's rest in a poor inn.
One silver piece is worth ten copper pieces, which
are common among laborers and beggars. A single
copper piece buys a candle, a torch, or a piece of
chalk.
In addition, unusual coins made of other precious
metals sometimes appear in treasure hoards. The
electrum piece (ep) and the platinum piece (pp)
originate from fallen empires and lost kingdoms, and
they sometimes arouse suspicion and skepticism
when used in transactions. An electrum piece is
worth five silver pieces, and a platinum piece is
worth ten gold pieces.
A standard coin weighs about a third of an ounce,
so fifty coins weigh a pound.
Standard Exchange Rates
Coin CP SP EP GP PP
Copper (cp) 1 1/10 1/50 1/100 1/1,000
Silver (sp) 10 1 1/5 1/10 1/100
Electrum (ep) 50 5 1 1/2 1/20
Gold (gp) 100 10 2 1 1/10
Platinum (pp) 1,000 100 20 10 1
Selling Treasure
Opportunities abound to find treasure, equipment,
weapons, armor, and more in the dungeons you
explore. Normally, you can sell your treasures and
trinkets when you return to a town or other
settlement, provided that you can find buyers and
merchants interested in your loot.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Arms, Armor, and Other Equipment. As a general
rule, undamaged weapons, armor, and other
equipment fetch half their cost when sold in a
market. Weapons and armor used by monsters are
rarely in good enough condition to sell.
Magic Items. Selling magic items is problematic.
Finding someone to buy a potion or a scroll isn't too
hard, but other items are out of the realm of most but
the wealthiest nobles. Likewise, aside from a few
common magic items, you won't normally come
across magic items or spells to purchase. The value
of magic is far beyond simple gold and should always
be treated as such.
Gems, Jewelry, and Art Objects. These items
retain their full value in the marketplace, and you
can either trade them in for coin or use them as
currency for other transactions. For exceptionally
valuable treasures, the GM might require you to find
a buyer in a large town or larger community first.
Trade Goods. On the borderlands, many people
conduct transactions through barter. Like gems and
art objects, trade goods-bars of iron, bags of salt,
livestock, and so on-retain their full value in the
market and can be used as currency.
Armor
Fantasy gaming worlds are a vast tapestry made up
of many different cultures, each with its own
technology level. For this reason, adventurers have
access to a variety of armor types, ranging from
leather armor to chain mail to costly plate armor,
with several other kinds of armor in between. The
Armor table collects the most commonly available
types of armor found in the game and separates
them into three categories: light armor, medium
armor, and heavy armor. Many warriors supplement
their armor with a shield.
The Armor table shows the cost, weight, and other
properties of the common types of armor worn in
fantasy gaming worlds.
Armor Proficiency. Anyone can put on a suit of
armor or strap a shield to an arm. Only those
proficient in the armor's use know how to wear it
effectively, however. Your class gives you proficiency
with certain types of armor. If you wear armor that
you lack proficiency with, you have disadvantage on
any ability check, saving throw, or attack roll that
involves Strength or Dexterity, and you can't cast
spells.
Armor Class (AC). Armor protects its wearer from
attacks. The armor (and shield) you wear
determines your base Armor Class.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 62

---

Heavy Armor. Heavier armor interferes with the
wearer's ability to move quickly, stealthily, and
freely. If the Armor table shows "Str 13" or "Str 15"
in the Strength column for an armor type, the armor
reduces the wearer's speed by 10 feet unless the
wearer has a Strength score equal to or higher than
the listed score.
Stealth. If the Armor table shows "Disadvantage"
in the Stealth column, the wearer has disadvantage
on Dexterity (Stealth) checks.
Shields. A shield is made from wood or metal and
is carried in one hand. Wielding a shield increases
your Armor Class by 2. You can benefit from only
one shield at a time.
Light Armor
Made from supple and thin materials, light armor
favors agile adventurers since it offers some
protection without sacrificing mobility. If you wear
light armor, you add your Dexterity modifier to the
base number from your armor type to determine
your Armor Class.
Padded. Padded armor consists of quilted layers
of cloth and batting.
Leather. The breastplate and shoulder protectors
of this armor are made of leather that has been
stiffened by being boiled in oil. The rest of the armor
is made of softer and more flexible materials.
Studded Leather. Made from tough but flexible
leather, studded leather is reinforced with close-set
rivets or spikes.
Medium Armor
Medium armor offers more protection than light
armor, but it also impairs movement more. If you
wear medium armor, you add your Dexterity
modifier, to a maximum of +2, to the base number
from your armor type to determine your Armor
Class.
Hide. This crude armor consists of thick furs and
pelts. It is commonly worn by barbarian tribes, evil
humanoids, and other folk who lack access to the
tools and materials needed to create better armor.
Chain Shirt. Made of interlocking metal rings, a
chain shirt is worn between layers of clothing or
leather. This armor offers modest protection to the
wearer's upper body and allows the sound of the
Armor
Armor Cost Armor Class (AC) Stre
Light Armor
Padded 5 gp 11 + Dex modifier -
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

rings rubbing against one another to be muffled by
outer layers.
Scale Mail. This armor consists of a coat and
leggings (and perhaps a separate skirt) of leather
covered with overlapping pieces of metal, much like
the scales of a fish. The suit includes gauntlets.
Breastplate. This armor consists of a fitted metal
chest piece worn with supple leather. Although it
leaves the legs and arms relatively unprotected, this
armor provides good protection for the wearer's
vital organs while leaving the wearer relatively
unencumbered.
Half Plate. Half plate consists of shaped metal
plates that cover most of the wearer's body. It does
not include leg protection beyond simple greaves
that are attached with leather straps.
Heavy Armor
Of all the armor categories, heavy armor offers the
best protection. These suits of armor cover the
entire body and are designed to stop a wide range of
attacks. Only proficient warriors can manage their
weight and bulk.
Heavy armor doesn't let you add your Dexterity
modifier to your Armor Class, but it also doesn't
penalize you if your Dexterity modifier is negative.
Ring Mail. This armor is leather armor with heavy
rings sewn into it. The rings help reinforce the armor
against blows from swords and axes. Ring mail is
inferior to chain mail, and it's usually worn only by
those who can't afford better armor.
Chain Mail. Made of interlocking metal rings,
chain mail includes a layer of quilted fabric worn
underneath the mail to prevent chafing and to
cushion the impact of blows. The suit includes
gauntlets.
Splint. This armor is made of narrow vertical
strips of metal riveted to a backing of leather that is
worn over cloth padding. Flexible chain mail
protects the joints.
Plate. Plate consists of shaped, interlocking metal
plates to cover the entire body. A suit of plate
includes gauntlets, heavy leather boots, a visored
helmet, and thick layers of padding underneath the
armor. Buckles and straps distribute the weight over
the body.
ength Stealth Weight
Disadvantage 8 lb.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 63

---

Leather 10 gp 11 + Dex modifier -
Studded leather 45 gp 12 + Dex modifier -
Medium Armor
Hide 10 gp 12 + Dex modifier (max 2) -
Chain shirt 50 gp 13 + Dex modifier (max 2) -
Scale mail 50 gp 14 + Dex modifier (max 2) -
Breastplate 400 gp 14 + Dex modifier (max 2) -
Half plate 750 gp 15 + Dex modifier (max 2) -
Heavy Armor
Ring mail 30 gp 14 -
Chain mail 75 gp 16 Str
Splint 200 gp 17 Str
Plate 1,500 gp 18 Str
Shield
Shield 10 gp +2 -
Getting Into and Out of Armor
The time it takes to don or doff armor depends on
the armor's category.
Don. This is the time it takes to put on armor. You
benefit from the armor's AC only if you take the full
time to don the suit of armor.
Doff. This is the time it takes to take off armor. If
you have help, reduce this time by half.
Donning and Doffing Armor
Category Don Doff
Light Armor 1 minute 1 minute
Medium Armor 5 minutes 1 minute
Heavy Armor 10 minutes 5 minutes
Shield 1 action 1 action
Weapons
Your class grants proficiency in certain weapons,
reflecting both the class's focus and the tools you are
most likely to use. Whether you favor a longsword or
a longbow, your weapon and your ability to wield it
effectively can mean the difference between life and
death while adventuring.
The Weapons table shows the most common
weapons used in the fantasy gaming worlds, their
price and weight, the damage they deal when they
hit, and any special properties they possess. Every
weapon is classified as either melee or ranged. A
melee weapon is used to attack a target within 5
feet of you, whereas a ranged weapon is used to
attack a target at a distance.
Weapon Proficiency
Your race, class, and feats can grant you proficiency
with certain weapons or categories of weapons. The
two categories are simple and martial. Most people
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

- 10 lb.
- 13 lb.
- 12 lb.
- 20 lb.
Disadvantage 45 lb.
- 20 lb.
Disadvantage 40 lb.
Disadvantage 40 lb.
13 Disadvantage 55 lb.
15 Disadvantage 60 lb.
15 Disadvantage 65 lb.
- 6 lb.
can use simple weapons with proficiency. These
weapons include clubs, maces, and other weapons
often found in the hands of commoners. Martial
weapons, including swords, axes, and polearms,
require more specialized training to use effectively.
Most warriors use martial weapons because these
weapons put their fighting style and training to best
use.
Proficiency with a weapon allows you to add your
proficiency bonus to the attack roll for any attack
you make with that weapon. If you make an attack
roll using a weapon with which you lack proficiency,
you do not add your proficiency bonus to the attack
roll.
Weapon Properties
Many weapons have special properties related to
their use, as shown in the Weapons table.
Ammunition. You can use a weapon that has the
ammunition property to make a ranged attack only if
you have ammunition to fire from the weapon. Each
time you attack with the weapon, you expend one
piece of ammunition. Drawing the ammunition from
a quiver, case, or other container is part of the attack
(you need a free hand to load a one-handed weapon).
At the end of the battle, you can recover half your
expended ammunition by taking a minute to search
the battlefield.
If you use a weapon that has the ammunition
property to make a melee attack, you treat the
weapon as an improvised weapon (see "Improvised
Weapons" later in the section). A sling must be
loaded to deal any damage when used in this way.
Finesse. When making an attack with a finesse
weapon, you use your choice of your Strength or
Dexterity modifier for the attack and damage rolls.
You must use the same modifier for both rolls.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 64

---

Heavy. Small creatures have disadvantage on
attack rolls with heavy weapons. A heavy weapon's
size and bulk make it too large for a Small creature
to use effectively.
Light. A light weapon is small and easy to handle,
making it ideal for use when fighting with two
weapons.
Loading. Because of the time required to load this
weapon, you can fire only one piece of ammunition
from it when you use an action, bonus action, or
reaction to fire it, regardless of the number of attacks
you can normally make.
Range. A weapon that can be used to make a
ranged attack has a range in parentheses after the
ammunition or thrown property. The range lists two
numbers. The first is the weapon's normal range in
feet, and the second indicates the weapon's long
range. When attacking a target beyond normal range,
you have disadvantage on the attack roll. You can't
attack a target beyond the weapon's long range.
Reach. This weapon adds 5 feet to your reach
when you attack with it, as well as when
determining your reach for opportunity attacks with
it.
Special. A weapon with the special property has
unusual rules governing its use, explained in the
weapon's description (see "Special Weapons" later
in this section).
Thrown. If a weapon has the thrown property, you
can throw the weapon to make a ranged attack. If the
weapon is a melee weapon, you use the same ability
modifier for that attack roll and damage roll that you
would use for a melee attack with the weapon. For
example, if you throw a handaxe, you use your
Strength, but if you throw a dagger, you can use
either your Strength or your Dexterity, since the
dagger has the finesse property.
Two-Handed. This weapon requires two hands
when you attack with it.
Versatile. This weapon can be used with one or
two hands. A damage value in parentheses appears
with the property-the damage when the weapon is
used with two hands to make a melee attack.
Improvised Weapons
Sometimes characters don't have their weapons and
have to attack with whatever is at hand. An
improvised weapon includes any object you can
Weapons
Name Cost Damage Weight P
Simple Melee Weapons
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

wield in one or two hands, such as broken glass, a
table leg, a frying pan, a wagon wheel, or a dead
goblin.
Often, an improvised weapon is similar to an
actual weapon and can be treated as such. For
example, a table leg is akin to a club. At the GM's
option, a character proficient with a weapon can use
a similar object as if it were that weapon and use his
or her proficiency bonus.
An object that bears no resemblance to a weapon
deals 1d4 damage (the GM assigns a damage type
appropriate to the object). If a character uses a
ranged weapon to make a melee attack, or throws a
melee weapon that does not have the thrown
property, it also deals 1d4 damage. An improvised
thrown weapon has a normal range of 20 feet and a
long range of 60 feet.
Silvered Weapons
Some monsters that have immunity or resistance to
nonmagical weapons are susceptible to silver
weapons, so cautious adventurers invest extra coin
to plate their weapons with silver. You can silver a
single weapon or ten pieces of ammunition for 100
gp. This cost represents not only the price of the
silver, but the time and expertise needed to add
silver to the weapon without making it less effective.
Special Weapons
Weapons with special rules are described here.
Lance. You have disadvantage when you use a
lance to attack a target within 5 feet of you. Also, a
lance requires two hands to wield when you aren't
mounted.
Net. A Large or smaller creature hit by a net is
restrained until it is freed. A net has no effect on
creatures that are formless, or creatures that are
Huge or larger. A creature can use its action to make
a DC 10 Strength check, freeing itself or another
creature within its reach on a success. Dealing 5
slashing damage to the net (AC 10) also frees the
creature without harming it, ending the effect and
destroying the net.
When you use an action, bonus action, or reaction
to attack with a net, you can make only one attack
regardless of the number of attacks you can
normally make.
Properties
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 65

---

Club 1 sp 1d4 bludgeoning 2 lb. L
Dagger 2 gp 1d4 piercing 1 lb. F
Greatclub 2 sp 1d8 bludgeoning 10 lb. T
Handaxe 5 gp 1d6 slashing 2 lb. L
Javelin 5 sp 1d6 piercing 2 lb. T
Light hammer 2 gp 1d4 bludgeoning 2 lb. L
Mace 5 gp 1d6 bludgeoning 4 lb. -
Quarterstaff 2 sp 1d6 bludgeoning 4 lb. V
Sickle 1 gp 1d4 slashing 2 lb. L
Spear 1 gp 1d6 piercing 3 lb. T
Simple Ranged Weapons
Crossbow, light 25 gp 1d8 piercing 5 lb. A
Dart 5 cp 1d4 piercing 1/4 lb. F
Shortbow 25 gp 1d6 piercing 2 lb. A
Sling 1 sp 1d4 bludgeoning - A
Martial Melee Weapons
Battleaxe 10 gp 1d8 slashing 4 lb. V
Flail 10 gp 1d8 bludgeoning 2 lb. -
Glaive 20 gp 1d10 slashing 6 lb. H
Greataxe 30 gp 1d12 slashing 7 lb. H
Greatsword 50 gp 2d6 slashing 6 lb. H
Halberd 20 gp 1d10 slashing 6 lb. H
Lance 10 gp 1d12 piercing 6 lb. R
Longsword 15 gp 1d8 slashing 3 lb. V
Maul 10 gp 2d6 bludgeoning 10 lb. H
Morningstar 15 gp 1d8 piercing 4 lb. -
Pike 5 gp 1d10 piercing 18 lb. H
Rapier 25 gp 1d8 piercing 2 lb. F
Scimitar 25 gp 1d6 slashing 3 lb. F
Shortsword 10 gp 1d6 piercing 2 lb. F
Trident 5 gp 1d6 piercing 4 lb. T
War pick 5 gp 1d8 piercing 2 lb. -
Warhammer 15 gp 1d8 bludgeoning 2 lb. V
Whip 2 gp 1d4 slashing 3 lb. F
Martial Ranged Weapons
Blowgun 10 gp 1 piercing 1 lb. A
Crossbow, hand 75 gp 1d6 piercing 3 lb. A
Crossbow, heavy 50 gp 1d10 piercing 18 lb. A
Longbow 50 gp 1d8 piercing 2 lb. A
Net 1 gp - 3 lb. S
Adventuring Gear
This section describes items that have special rules
or require further explanation.
Acid. As an action, you can splash the contents of
this vial onto a creature within 5 feet of you or throw
the vial up to 20 feet, shattering it on impact. In
either case, make a ranged attack against a creature
or object, treating the acid as an improvised weapon.
On a hit, the target takes 2d6 acid damage.
Alchemist's Fire. This sticky, adhesive fluid ignites
when exposed to air. As an action, you can throw this
flask up to 20 feet, shattering it on impact. Make a
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Light
Finesse, light, thrown (range 20/60)
Two-handed
Light, thrown (range 20/60)
Thrown (range 30/120)
Light, thrown (range 20/60)
-
Versatile (1d8)
Light
Thrown (range 20/60), versatile (1d8)
Ammunition (range 80/320), loading, two-handed
Finesse, thrown (range 20/60)
Ammunition (range 80/320), two-handed
Ammunition (range 30/120)
Versatile (1d10)
-
Heavy, reach, two-handed
Heavy, two-handed
Heavy, two-handed
Heavy, reach, two-handed
Reach, special
Versatile (1d10)
Heavy, two-handed
-
Heavy, reach, two-handed
Finesse
Finesse, light
Finesse, light
Thrown (range 20/60), versatile (1d8)
-
Versatile (1d10)
Finesse, reach
Ammunition (range 25/100), loading
Ammunition (range 30/120), light, loading
Ammunition (range 100/400), heavy, loading, two-handed
Ammunition (range 150/600), heavy, two-handed
Special, thrown (range 5/15)
ranged attack against a creature or object, treating
the alchemist's fire as an improvised weapon. On a
hit, the target takes 1d4 fire damage at the start of
each of its turns. A creature can end this damage by
using its action to make a DC 10 Dexterity check to
extinguish the flames.
Antitoxin. A creature that drinks this vial of liquid
gains advantage on saving throws against poison for
1 hour. It confers no benefit to undead or constructs.
Arcane Focus. An arcane focus is a special item-
an orb, a crystal, a rod, a specially constructed staff, a
wand-like length of wood, or some similar item-
designed to channel the power of arcane spells. A
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 66

---

sorcerer, warlock, or wizard can use such an item as
a spellcasting focus.
Ball Bearings. As an action, you can spill these
tiny metal balls from their pouch to cover a level,
square area that is 10 feet on a side. A creature
moving across the covered area must succeed on a
DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or fall prone. A
creature moving through the area at half speed
doesn't need to make the save.
Block and Tackle. A set of pulleys with a cable
threaded through them and a hook to attach to
objects, a block and tackle allows you to hoist up to
four times the weight you can normally lift.
Book. A book might contain poetry, historical
accounts, information pertaining to a particular field
of lore, diagrams and notes on gnomish contraptions,
or just about anything else that can be represented
using text or pictures. A book of spells is a spellbook
(described later in this section).
Caltrops. As an action, you can spread a bag of
caltrops to cover a square area that is 5 feet on a side.
Any creature that enters the area must succeed on a
DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or stop moving this
turn and take 1 piercing damage. Taking this damage
reduces the creature's walking speed by 10 feet until
the creature regains at least 1 hit point. A creature
moving through the area at half speed doesn't need
to make the save.
Candle. For 1 hour, a candle sheds bright light in a
5-foot radius and dim light for an additional 5 feet.
Case, Crossbow Bolt. This wooden case can hold
up to twenty crossbow bolts.
Case, Map or Scroll. This cylindrical leather case
can hold up to ten rolled-up sheets of paper or five
rolled-up sheets of parchment.
Chain. A chain has 10 hit points. It can be burst
with a successful DC 20 Strength check.
Climber's Kit. A climber's kit includes special
pitons, boot tips, gloves, and a harness. You can use
the climber's kit as an action to anchor yourself;
when you do, you can't fall more than 25 feet from
the point where you anchored yourself, and you
can't climb more than 25 feet away from that point
without undoing the anchor.
Component Pouch. A component pouch is a small,
watertight leather belt pouch that has compartments
to hold all the material components and other
special items you need to cast your spells, except for
those components that have a specific cost (as
indicated in a spell's description).
Crowbar. Using a crowbar grants advantage to
Strength checks where the crowbar's leverage can
be applied.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Druidic Focus. A druidic focus might be a sprig of
mistletoe or holly, a wand or scepter made of yew or
another special wood, a staff drawn whole out of a
living tree, or a totem object incorporating feathers,
fur, bones, and teeth from sacred animals. A druid
can use such an object as a spellcasting focus.
Fishing Tackle. This kit includes a wooden rod,
silken line, corkwood bobbers, steel hooks, lead
sinkers, velvet lures, and narrow netting.
Healer's Kit. This kit is a leather pouch containing
bandages, salves, and splints. The kit has ten uses. As
an action, you can expend one use of the kit to
stabilize a creature that has 0 hit points, without
needing to make a Wisdom (Medicine) check.
Holy Symbol. A holy symbol is a representation of
a god or pantheon. It might be an amulet depicting a
symbol representing a deity, the same symbol
carefully engraved or inlaid as an emblem on a
shield, or a tiny box holding a fragment of a sacred
relic. Appendix PH-B "Fantasy-Historical Pantheons"
lists the symbols commonly associated with many
gods in the multiverse. A cleric or paladin can use a
holy symbol as a spellcasting focus. To use the
symbol in this way, the caster must hold it in hand,
wear it visibly, or bear it on a shield.
Holy Water. As an action, you can splash the
contents of this flask onto a creature within 5 feet of
you or throw it up to 20 feet, shattering it on impact.
In either case, make a ranged attack against a target
creature, treating the holy water as an improvised
weapon. If the target is a fiend or undead, it takes
2d6 radiant damage.
A cleric or paladin may create holy water by
performing a special ritual. The ritual takes 1 hour to
perform, uses 25 gp worth of powdered silver, and
requires the caster to expend a 1st-level spell slot.
Hunting Trap. When you use your action to set it,
this trap forms a saw-toothed steel ring that snaps
shut when a creature steps on a pressure plate in the
center. The trap is affixed by a heavy chain to an
immobile object, such as a tree or a spike driven into
the ground. A creature that steps on the plate must
succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw or take
1d4 piercing damage and stop moving. Thereafter,
until the creature breaks free of the trap, its
movement is limited by the length of the chain
(typically 3 feet long). A creature can use its action
to make a DC 13 Strength check, freeing itself or
another creature within its reach on a success. Each
failed check deals 1 piercing damage to the trapped
creature.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 67

---

Lamp. A lamp casts bright light in a 15-foot radius
and dim light for an additional 30 feet. Once lit, it
burns for 6 hours on a flask (1 pint) of oil.
Lantern, Bullseye. A bullseye lantern casts bright
light in a 60-foot cone and dim light for an additional
60 feet. Once lit, it burns for 6 hours on a flask (1
pint) of oil.
Lantern, Hooded. A hooded lantern casts bright
light in a 30-foot radius and dim light for an
additional 30 feet. Once lit, it burns for 6 hours on a
flask (1 pint) of oil. As an action, you can lower the
hood, reducing the light to dim light in a 5-foot
radius.
Lock. A key is provided with the lock. Without the
key, a creature proficient with thieves' tools can pick
this lock with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check.
Your GM may decide that better locks are available
for higher prices.
Magnifying Glass. This lens allows a closer look at
small objects. It is also useful as a substitute for flint
and steel when starting fires. Lighting a fire with a
magnifying glass requires light as bright as sunlight
to focus, tinder to ignite, and about 5 minutes for the
fire to ignite. A magnifying glass grants advantage on
any ability check made to appraise or inspect an
item that is small or highly detailed.
Manacles. These metal restraints can bind a Small
or Medium creature. Escaping the manacles requires
a successful DC 20 Dexterity check. Breaking them
requires a successful DC 20 Strength check. Each set
of manacles comes with one key. Without the key, a
creature proficient with thieves' tools can pick the
manacles' lock with a successful DC 15 Dexterity
check. Manacles have 15 hit points.
Mess Kit. This tin box contains a cup and simple
cutlery. The box clamps together, and one side can
be used as a cooking pan and the other as a plate or
shallow bowl.
Oil. Oil usually comes in a clay flask that holds 1
pint. As an action, you can splash the oil in this flask
onto a creature within 5 feet of you or throw it up to
20 feet, shattering it on impact. Make a ranged attack
against a target creature or object, treating the oil as
an improvised weapon. On a hit, the target is
covered in oil. If the target takes any fire damage
before the oil dries (after 1 minute), the target takes
an additional 5 fire damage from the burning oil. You
can also pour a flask of oil on the ground to cover a
5-foot-square area, provided that the surface is level.
If lit, the oil burns for 2 rounds and deals 5 fire
damage to any creature that enters the area or ends
its turn in the area. A creature can take this damage
only once per turn.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Poison, Basic. You can use the poison in this vial
to coat one slashing or piercing weapon or up to
three pieces of ammunition. Applying the poison
takes an action. A creature hit by the poisoned
weapon or ammunition must make a DC 10
Constitution saving throw or take 1d4 poison
damage. Once applied, the poison retains potency for
1 minute before drying.
Potion of Healing. A character who drinks the
magical red fluid in this vial regains 2d4 + 2 hit
points. Drinking or administering a potion takes an
action.
Pouch. A cloth or leather pouch can hold up to 20
sling bullets or 50 blowgun needles, among other
things. A compartmentalized pouch for holding spell
components is called a component pouch (described
earlier in this section).
Quiver. A quiver can hold up to 20 arrows.
Ram, Portable. You can use a portable ram to
break down doors. When doing so, you gain a +4
bonus on the Strength check. One other character
can help you use the ram, giving you advantage on
this check.
Rations. Rations consist of dry foods suitable for
extended travel, including jerky, dried fruit, hardtack,
and nuts.
Rope. Rope, whether made of hemp or silk, has 2
hit points and can be burst with a DC 17 Strength
check.
Scale, Merchant's. A scale includes a small
balance, pans, and a suitable assortment of weights
up to 2 pounds. With it, you can measure the exact
weight of small objects, such as raw precious metals
or trade goods, to help determine their worth.
Spellbook. Essential for wizards, a spellbook is a
leather-bound tome with 100 blank vellum pages
suitable for recording spells.
Spyglass. Objects viewed through a spyglass are
magnified to twice their size.
Tent. A simple and portable canvas shelter, a tent
sleeps two.
Tinderbox. This small container holds flint, fire
steel, and tinder (usually dry cloth soaked in light
oil) used to kindle a fire. Using it to light a torch-or
anything else with abundant, exposed fuel-takes an
action. Lighting any other fire takes 1 minute.
Torch. A torch burns for 1 hour, providing bright
light in a 20-foot radius and dim light for an
additional 20 feet. If you make a melee attack with a
burning torch and hit, it deals 1 fire damage.
Adventuring Gear
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 68

---

Item Cost Weight
Abacus 2 gp 2 lb.
Acid (vial) 25 gp 1 lb.
Alchemist's fire (flask) 50 gp 1 lb.
Ammunition
Arrows (20) 1 gp 1 lb.
Blowgun needles (50) 1 gp 1 lb.
Crossbow bolts (20) 1 gp 1 lb.
Sling bullets (20) 4 cp 1 lb.
Antitoxin (vial) 50 gp -
Arcane focus
Crystal 10 gp 1 lb.
Orb 20 gp 3 lb.
Rod 10 gp 2 lb.
Staff 5 gp 4 lb.
Wand 10 gp 1 lb.
Backpack 2 gp 5 lb.
Ball bearings (bag of 1,000) 1 gp 2 lb.
Barrel 2 gp 70 lb.
Basket 4 sp 2 lb.
Bedroll 1 gp 7 lb.
Bell 1 gp -
Blanket 5 sp 3 lb.
Block and tackle 1 gp 5 lb.
Book 25 gp 5 lb.
Bottle, glass 2 gp 2 lb.
Bucket 5 cp 2 lb.
Caltrops (bag of 20) 1 gp 2 lb.
Candle 1 cp -
Case, crossbow bolt 1 gp 1 lb.
Case, map or scroll 1 gp 1 lb.
Chain (10 feet) 5 gp 10 lb.
Chalk (1 piece) 1 cp -
Chest 5 gp 25 lb.
Climber's kit 25 gp 12 lb.
Clothes, common 5 sp 3 lb.
Clothes, costume 5 gp 4 lb.
Clothes, fine 15 gp 6 lb.
Clothes, traveler's 2 gp 4 lb.
Component pouch 25 gp 2 lb.
Crowbar 2 gp 5 lb.
Druidic focus
Sprig of mistletoe 1 gp -
Totem 1 gp -
Wooden staff 5 gp 4 lb.
Yew wand 10 gp 1 lb.
Fishing tackle 1 gp 4 lb.
Flask or tankard 2 cp 1 lb.
Grappling hook 2 gp 4 lb.
Hammer 1 gp 3 lb.
Hammer, sledge 2 gp 10 lb.
Healer's kit 5 gp 3 lb.
Holy symbol
Amulet 5 gp 1 lb.
Emblem 5 gp -
Reliquary 5 gp 2 lb.
Holy water (flask) 25 gp 1 lb.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Hourglass 25 gp 1 lb.
Hunting trap 5 gp 25 lb.
Ink (1 ounce bottle) 10 gp -
Ink pen 2 cp -
Jug or pitcher 2 cp 4 lb.
Ladder (10-foot) 1 sp 25 lb.
Lamp 5 sp 1 lb.
Lantern, bullseye 10 gp 2 lb.
Lantern, hooded 5 gp 2 lb.
Lock 10 gp 1 lb.
Magnifying glass 100 gp -
Manacles 2 gp 6 lb.
Mess kit 2 sp 1 lb.
Mirror, steel 5 gp 1/2 lb.
Oil (flask) 1 sp 1 lb.
Paper (one sheet) 2 sp -
Parchment (one sheet) 1 sp -
Perfume (vial) 5 gp -
Pick, miner's 2 gp 10 lb.
Piton 5 cp 1/4 lb.
Poison, basic (vial) 100 gp -
Pole (10-foot) 5 cp 7 lb.
Pot, iron 2 gp 10 lb.
Potion of healing 50 gp 1/2 lb.
Pouch 5 sp 1 lb.
Quiver 1 gp 1 lb.
Ram, portable 4 gp 35 lb.
Rations (1 day) 5 sp 2 lb.
Robes 1 gp 4 lb.
Rope, hempen (50 feet) 1 gp 10 lb.
Rope, silk (50 feet) 10 gp 5 lb.
Sack 1 cp 1/2 lb.
Scale, merchant's 5 gp 3 lb.
Sealing wax 5 sp -
Shovel 2 gp 5 lb.
Signal whistle 5 cp -
Signet ring 5 gp -
Soap 2 cp -
Spellbook 50 gp 3 lb.
Spikes, iron (10) 1 gp 5 lb.
Spyglass 1,000 gp 1 lb.
Tent, two-person 2 gp 20 lb.
Tinderbox 5 sp 1 lb.
Torch 1 cp 1 lb.
Vial 1 gp -
Waterskin 2 sp 5 lb. (full)
Whetstone 1 cp 1 lb.
Container Capacity
Container Capacity
Backpack* 1 cubic foot/30 pounds of gear
Barrel 40 gallons liquid, 4 cubic feet solid
Basket 2 cubic feet/40 pounds of gear
Bottle 1 pints liquid
Bucket 3 gallons liquid, 1/2 cubic foot solid
Chest 12 cubic feet/300 pounds of gear
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 69

---

Flask or tankard 1 pint liquid
Jug or pitcher 1 gallon liquid
Pot, iron 1 gallon liquid
Pouch 1/5 cubic foot/6 pounds of gear
Sack 1 cubic foot/30 pounds of gear
Vial 4 ounces liquid
Waterskin 4 pints liquid
* You can also strap items, such as a bedroll or a coil of rope,
to the outside of a backpack.
Equipment Packs
The starting equipment you get from your class includes a
collection of useful adventuring gear, put together in a pack.
The contents of these packs are listed here. If you are buying
your starting equipment, you can purchase a pack for the
price shown, which might be cheaper than buying the items
individually.
Burglar's Pack (16 gp). Includes a backpack, a bag of 1,000
ball bearings, 10 feet of string, a bell, 5 candles, a crowbar, a
hammer, 10 pitons, a hooded lantern, 2 flasks of oil, 5 days
rations, a tinderbox, and a waterskin. The pack also has 50
feet of hempen rope strapped to the side of it.
Diplomat's Pack (39 gp). Includes a chest, 2 cases for maps
and scrolls, a set of fine clothes, a bottle of ink, an ink pen, a
lamp, 2 flasks of oil, 5 sheets of paper, a vial of perfume,
sealing wax, and soap.
Dungeoneer's Pack (12 gp). Includes a backpack, a
crowbar, a hammer, 10 pitons, 10 torches, a tinderbox, 10
days of rations, and a waterskin. The pack also has 50 feet of
hempen rope strapped to the side of it.
Entertainer's Pack (40 gp). Includes a backpack, a bedroll,
2 costumes, 5 candles, 5 days of rations, a waterskin, and a
disguise kit.
Explorer's Pack (10 gp). Includes a backpack, a bedroll, a
mess kit, a tinderbox, 10 torches, 10 days of rations, and a
waterskin. The pack also has 50 feet of hempen rope
strapped to the side of it.
Priest's Pack (19 gp). Includes a backpack, a blanket, 10
candles, a tinderbox, an alms box, 2 blocks of incense, a
censer, vestments, 2 days of rations, and a waterskin.
Scholar's Pack (40 gp). Includes a backpack, a book of lore,
a bottle of ink, an ink pen, 10 sheets of parchment, a little
bag of sand, and a small knife.
Tools
A tool helps you to do something you couldn't
otherwise do, such as craft or repair an item, forge a
document, or pick a lock. Your race, class,
background, or feats give you proficiency with
certain tools. Proficiency with a tool allows you to
add your proficiency bonus to any ability check you
make using that tool. Tool use is not tied to a single
ability, since proficiency with a tool represents
broader knowledge of its use. For example, the GM
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

might ask you to make a Dexterity check to carve a
fine detail with your woodcarver's tools, or a
Strength check to make something out of
particularly hard wood.
Tools
Item Cost Weight
Artisan's tools
Alchemist's supplies 50 gp 8 lb.
Brewer's supplies 20 gp 9 lb.
Calligrapher's supplies 10 gp 5 lb.
Carpenter's tools 8 gp 6 lb.
Cartographer's tools 15 gp 6 lb.
Cobbler's tools 5 gp 5 lb.
Cook's utensils 1 gp 8 lb.
Glassblower's tools 30 gp 5 lb.
Jeweler's tools 25 gp 2 lb.
Leatherworker's tools 5 gp 5 lb.
Mason's tools 10 gp 8 lb.
Painter's supplies 10 gp 5 lb.
Potter's tools 10 gp 3 lb.
Smith's tools 20 gp 8 lb.
Tinker's tools 50 gp 10 lb.
Weaver's tools 1 gp 5 lb.
Woodcarver's tools 1 gp 5 lb.
Disguise kit 25 gp 3 lb.
Forgery kit 15 gp 5 lb.
Gaming set
Dice set 1 sp -
Playing card set 5 sp -
Herbalism kit 5 gp 3 lb.
Musical instrument
Bagpipes 30 gp 6 lb.
Drum 6 gp 3 lb.
Dulcimer 25 gp 10 lb.
Flute 2 gp 1 lb.
Lute 35 gp 2 lb.
Lyre 30 gp 2 lb.
Horn 3 gp 2 lb.
Pan flute 12 gp 2 lb.
Shawm 2 gp 1 lb.
Viol 30 gp 1 lb.
Navigator's tools 25 gp 2 lb.
Poisoner's kit 50 gp 2 lb.
Thieves' tools 25 gp 1 lb.
Vehicles (land or water) * *
* See the "Mounts and Vehicles" section.
Artisan's Tools. These special tools include the
items needed to pursue a craft or trade. The table
shows examples of the most common types of tools,
each providing items related to a single craft.
Proficiency with a set of artisan's tools lets you add
your proficiency bonus to any ability checks you
make using the tools in your craft. Each type of
artisan's tools requires a separate proficiency.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 70

---

Disguise Kit. This pouch of cosmetics, hair dye,
and small props lets you create disguises that change
your physical appearance. Proficiency with this kit
lets you add your proficiency bonus to any ability
checks you make to create a visual disguise.
Forgery Kit. This small box contains a variety of
papers and parchments, pens and inks, seals and
sealing wax, gold and silver leaf, and other supplies
necessary to create convincing forgeries of physical
documents. Proficiency with this kit lets you add
your proficiency bonus to any ability checks you
make to create a physical forgery of a document.
Gaming Set. This item encompasses a wide range
of game pieces, including dice and decks of cards (for
games such as Three-Dragon Ante). A few common
examples appear on the Tools table, but other kinds
of gaming sets exist. If you are proficient with a
gaming set, you can add your proficiency bonus to
ability checks you make to play a game with that set.
Each type of gaming set requires a separate
proficiency.
Herbalism Kit. This kit contains a variety of
instruments such as clippers, mortar and pestle, and
pouches and vials used by herbalists to create
remedies and potions. Proficiency with this kit lets
you add your proficiency bonus to any ability checks
you make to identify or apply herbs. Also,
proficiency with this kit is required to create
antitoxin and potions of healing.
Musical Instrument. Several of the most common
types of musical instruments are shown on the table
as examples. If you have proficiency with a given
musical instrument, you can add your proficiency
bonus to any ability checks you make to play music
with the instrument. A bard can use a musical
instrument as a spellcasting focus. Each type of
musical instrument requires a separate proficiency.
Navigator's Tools. This set of instruments is used
for navigation at sea. Proficiency with navigator's
tools lets you chart a ship's course and follow
navigation charts. In addition, these tools allow you
to add your proficiency bonus to any ability check
you make to avoid getting lost at sea.
Poisoner's Kit. A poisoner's kit includes the vials,
chemicals, and other equipment necessary for the
creation of poisons. Proficiency with this kit lets you
add your proficiency bonus to any ability checks you
make to craft or use poisons.
Thieves' Tools. This set of tools includes a small
file, a set of lock picks, a small mirror mounted on a
metal handle, a set of narrow-bladed scissors, and a
pair of pliers. Proficiency with these tools lets you
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

add your proficiency bonus to any ability checks you
make to disarm traps or open locks.
Mounts and Vehicles
A good mount can help you move more quickly
through the wilderness, but its primary purpose is to
carry the gear that would otherwise slow you down.
The Mounts and Other Animals table shows each
animal's speed and base carrying capacity.
An animal pulling a carriage, cart, chariot, sled, or
wagon can move weight up to five times its base
carrying capacity, including the weight of the vehicle.
If multiple animals pull the same vehicle, they can
add their carrying capacity together.
Mounts other than those listed here are available
in fantasy gaming worlds, but they are rare and not
normally available for purchase. These include flying
mounts (pegasi, griffons, hippogriffs, and similar
animals) and even aquatic mounts (giant sea horses,
for example). Acquiring such a mount often means
securing an egg and raising the creature yourself,
making a bargain with a powerful entity, or
negotiating with the mount itself.
Barding. Barding is armor designed to protect an
animal's head, neck, chest, and body. Any type of
armor shown on the Armor table can be purchased
as barding. The cost is four times the equivalent
armor made for humanoids, and it weighs twice as
much.
Saddles. A military saddle braces the rider,
helping you keep your seat on an active mount in
battle. It gives you advantage on any check you make
to remain mounted. An exotic saddle is required for
riding any aquatic or flying mount.
Vehicle Proficiency. If you have proficiency with a
certain kind of vehicle (land or water), you can add
your proficiency bonus to any check you make to
control that kind of vehicle in difficult circumstances.
Rowed Vessels. Keelboats and rowboats are used
on lakes and rivers. If going downstream, add the
speed of the current (typically 3 miles per hour) to
the speed of the vehicle. These vehicles can't be
rowed against any significant current, but they can
be pulled upstream by draft animals on the shores. A
rowboat weighs 100 pounds, in case adventurers
carry it over land.
Mounts and Other Animals
Carrying
Item Cost Speed Capacity
Camel 50 gp 50 ft. 480 lb.
Donkey or mule 8 gp 40 ft. 420 lb.
Elephant 200 gp 40 ft. 1,320 lb.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 71

---

Horse, draft 50 gp 40 ft. 540 lb.
Horse, riding 75 gp 60 ft. 480 lb.
Mastiff 25 gp 40 ft. 195 lb.
Pony 30 gp 40 ft. 225 lb.
Warhorse 400 gp 60 ft. 540 lb.
Tack, Harness, and Drawn Vehicles
Item Cost Weight
Barding x4 x2
Bit and bridle 2 gp 1 lb.
Carriage 100 gp 600 lb.
Cart 15 gp 200 lb.
Chariot 250 gp 100 lb.
Feed (per day) 5 cp 10 lb.
Saddle
Exotic 60 gp 40 lb.
Military 20 gp 30 lb.
Pack 5 gp 15 lb.
Riding 10 gp 25 lb.
Saddlebags 4 gp 8 lb.
Sled 20 gp 300 lb.
Stabling (per day) 5 sp -
Wagon 35 gp 400 lb.
Waterborne Vehicles
Item Cost Speed
Galley 30,000 gp 4 mph
Keelboat 3,000 gp 1 mph
Longship 10,000 gp 3 mph
Rowboat 50 gp 1 mph
Sailing ship 10,000 gp 2 mph
Warship 25,000 gp 2 mph
Trade Goods
Most wealth is not in coins. It is measured in
livestock, grain, land, rights to collect taxes, or rights
to resources (such as a mine or a forest).
Guilds, nobles, and royalty regulate trade.
Chartered companies are granted rights to conduct
trade along certain routes, to send merchant ships to
various ports, or to buy or sell specific goods. Guilds
set prices for the goods or services that they control,
and determine who may or may not offer those
goods and services. Merchants commonly exchange
trade goods without using currency. The Trade
Goods table shows the value of commonly
exchanged goods.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Trade Goods
Cost Goods
1 cp 1 lb. of wheat
2 cp 1 lb. of flour or one chicken
5 cp 1 lb. of salt
1 sp 1 lb. of iron or 1 sq. yd. of canvas
5 sp 1 lb. of copper or 1 sq. yd. of cotton cloth
1 gp 1 lb. of ginger or one goat
2 gp 1 lb. of cinnamon or pepper, or one sheep
3 gp 1 lb. of cloves or one pig
5 gp 1 lb. of silver or 1 sq. yd. of linen
10 gp 1 sq. yd. of silk or one cow
15 gp 1 lb. of saffron or one ox
50 gp 1 lb. of gold
500 gp 1 lb. of platinum
Expenses
When not descending into the depths of the earth,
exploring ruins for lost treasures, or waging war
against the encroaching darkness, adventurers face
more mundane realities. Even in a fantastical world,
people require basic necessities such as shelter,
sustenance, and clothing. These things cost money,
although some lifestyles cost more than others.
Lifestyle Expenses
Lifestyle expenses provide you with a simple way to
account for the cost of living in a fantasy world. They
cover your accommodations, food and drink, and all
your other necessities. Furthermore, expenses cover
the cost of maintaining your equipment so you can
be ready when adventure next calls.
At the start of each week or month (your choice),
choose a lifestyle from the Expenses table and pay
the price to sustain that lifestyle. The prices listed
are per day, so if you wish to calculate the cost of
your chosen lifestyle over a thirty-day period,
multiply the listed price by 30. Your lifestyle might
change from one period to the next, based on the
funds you have at your disposal, or you might
maintain the same lifestyle throughout your
character's career.
Your lifestyle choice can have consequences.
Maintaining a wealthy lifestyle might help you make
contacts with the rich and powerful, though you run
the risk of attracting thieves. Likewise, living frugally
might help you avoid criminals, but you are unlikely
to make powerful connections.
Lifestyle Expenses
Lifestyle Price/Day
Wretched -
Squalid 1 sp
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 72

---

Poor 2 sp
Modest 1 gp
Comfortable 2 gp
Wealthy 4 gp
Aristocratic 10 gp minimum
Wretched. You live in inhumane conditions. With
no place to call home, you shelter wherever you can,
sneaking into barns, huddling in old crates, and
relying on the good graces of people better off than
you. A wretched lifestyle presents abundant dangers.
Violence, disease, and hunger follow you wherever
you go. Other wretched people covet your armor,
weapons, and adventuring gear, which represent a
fortune by their standards. You are beneath the
notice of most people.
Squalid. You live in a leaky stable, a mud-floored
hut just outside town, or a vermin-infested boarding
house in the worst part of town. You have shelter
from the elements, but you live in a desperate and
often violent environment, in places rife with disease,
hunger, and misfortune. You are beneath the notice
of most people, and you have few legal protections.
Most people at this lifestyle level have suffered some
terrible setback. They might be disturbed, marked as
exiles, or suffer from disease.
Poor. A poor lifestyle means going without the
comforts available in a stable community. Simple
food and lodgings, threadbare clothing, and
unpredictable conditions result in a sufficient,
though probably unpleasant, experience. Your
accommodations might be a room in a flophouse or
in the common room above a tavern. You benefit
from some legal protections, but you still have to
contend with violence, crime, and disease. People at
this lifestyle level tend to be unskilled laborers,
costermongers, peddlers, thieves, mercenaries, and
other disreputable types.
Modest. A modest lifestyle keeps you out of the
slums and ensures that you can maintain your
equipment. You live in an older part of town, renting
a room in a boarding house, inn, or temple. You don't
go hungry or thirsty, and your living conditions are
clean, if simple. Ordinary people living modest
lifestyles include soldiers with families, laborers,
students, priests, hedge wizards, and the like.
Comfortable. Choosing a comfortable lifestyle
means that you can afford nicer clothing and can
easily maintain your equipment. You live in a small
cottage in a middle-class neighborhood or in a
private room at a fine inn. You associate with
merchants, skilled tradespeople, and military
officers.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Wealthy. Choosing a wealthy lifestyle means
living a life of luxury, though you might not have
achieved the social status associated with the old
money of nobility or royalty. You live a lifestyle
comparable to that of a highly successful merchant, a
favored servant of the royalty, or the owner of a few
small businesses. You have respectable lodgings,
usually a spacious home in a good part of town or a
comfortable suite at a fine inn. You likely have a
small staff of servants.
Aristocratic. You live a life of plenty and comfort.
You move in circles populated by the most powerful
people in the community. You have excellent
lodgings, perhaps a townhouse in the nicest part of
town or rooms in the finest inn. You dine at the best
restaurants, retain the most skilled and fashionable
tailor, and have servants attending to your every
need. You receive invitations to the social gatherings
of the rich and powerful, and spend evenings in the
company of politicians, guild leaders, high priests,
and nobility. You must also contend with the highest
levels of deceit and treachery. The wealthier you are,
the greater the chance you will be drawn into
political intrigue as a pawn or participant.
Self-Sufficiency
The expenses and lifestyles described here assume that you
are spending your time between adventures in town, availing
yourself of whatever services you can afford-paying for food
and shelter, paying townspeople to sharpen your sword and
repair your armor, and so on. Some characters, though,
might prefer to spend their time away from civilization,
sustaining themselves in the wild by hunting, foraging, and
repairing their own gear.
Maintaining this kind of lifestyle doesn't require you to
spend any coin, but it is time-consuming. If you spend your
time between adventures practicing a profession, you can
eke out the equivalent of a poor lifestyle. Proficiency in the
Survival skill lets you live at the equivalent of a comfortable
lifestyle.
Food, Drink, and Lodging
The Food, Drink, and Lodging table gives prices for
individual food items and a single night's lodging.
These prices are included in your total lifestyle
expenses.
Food, Drink, and Lodging
Item Cost
Ale
Gallon 2 sp
Mug 4 cp
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 73

---

Banquet (per person) 10 gp
Bread, loaf 2 cp
Cheese, hunk 1 sp
Inn stay (per day)
Squalid 7 cp
Poor 1 sp
Modest 5 sp
Comfortable 8 sp
Wealthy 2 gp
Aristocratic 4 gp
Meals (per day)
Squalid 3 cp
Poor 6 cp
Modest 3 sp
Comfortable 5 sp
Wealthy 8 sp
Aristocratic 2 gp
Meat, chunk 3 sp
Wine
Common (pitcher) 2 sp
Fine (bottle) 10 gp
Services
Adventurers can pay nonplayer characters to assist
them or act on their behalf in a variety of
circumstances. Most such hirelings have fairly
ordinary skills, while others are masters of a craft or
art, and a few are experts with specialized
adventuring skills.
Some of the most basic types of hirelings appear
on the Services table. Other common hirelings
include any of the wide variety of people who
inhabit a typical town or city, when the adventurers
pay them to perform a specific task. For example, a
wizard might pay a carpenter to construct an
elaborate chest (and its miniature replica) for use in
the secret chest spell. A fighter might commission a
blacksmith to forge a special sword. A bard might
pay a tailor to make exquisite clothing for an
upcoming performance in front of the duke.
Other hirelings provide more expert or dangerous
services. Mercenary soldiers paid to help the
adventurers take on a hobgoblin army are hirelings,
as are sages hired to research ancient or esoteric
lore. If a high-level adventurer establishes a
stronghold of some kind, he or she might hire a
whole staff of servants and agents to run the place,
from a castellan or steward to menial laborers to
keep the stables clean. These hirelings often enjoy a
long-term contract that includes a place to live
within the stronghold as part of the offered
compensation.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Services
Service Pay
Coach cab
Between towns 3 cp per mile
Within a city 1 cp
Hireling
Skilled 2 gp per day
Untrained 2 sp per day
Messenger 2 cp per mile
Road or gate toll 1 cp
Ship's passage 1 sp per mile
Skilled hirelings include anyone hired to perform a
service that involves a proficiency (including
weapon, tool, or skill): a mercenary, artisan, scribe,
and so on. The pay shown is a minimum; some
expert hirelings require more pay. Untrained
hirelings are hired for menial work that requires no
particular skill and can include laborers, porters,
maids, and similar workers.
Spellcasting Services
People who are able to cast spells don't fall into the
category of ordinary hirelings. It might be possible
to find someone willing to cast a spell in exchange
for coin or favors, but it is rarely easy and no
established pay rates exist. As a rule, the higher the
level of the desired spell, the harder it is to find
someone who can cast it and the more it costs.
Hiring someone to cast a relatively common spell
of 1st or 2nd level, such as cure wounds or identify, is
easy enough in a city or town, and might cost 10 to
50 gold pieces (plus the cost of any expensive
material components). Finding someone able and
willing to cast a higher-level spell might involve
traveling to a large city, perhaps one with a
university or prominent temple. Once found, the
spellcaster 
...[truncated]

## Combat

Combat
A typical combat encounter is a clash between two
sides, a flurry of weapon swings, feints, parries,
footwork, and spellcasting. The game organizes the
chaos of combat into a cycle of rounds and turns. A
round represents about 6 seconds in the game
world. During a round, each participant in a battle
takes a turn. The order of turns is determined at the
beginning of a combat encounter, when everyone
rolls initiative. Once everyone has taken a turn, the
fight continues to the next round if neither side has
defeated the other.
Combat Step by Step
1. Determine surprise. The GM determines whether anyone
involved in the combat encounter is surprised.
2. Establish positions. The GM decides where all the
characters and monsters are located. Given the
adventurers marching order or their stated positions in
the room or other location, the GM figures out where the
adversaries arehow far away and in what direction.
3. Roll initiative. Everyone involved in the combat encounter
rolls initiative, determining the order of combatants turns.
4. Take turns. Each participant in the battle takes a turn in
initiative order.
5. Begin the next round. When everyone involved in the
combat has had a turn, the round ends. Repeat step 4 until
the fighting stops.
Surprise
A band of adventurers sneaks up on a bandit camp,
springing from the trees to attack them. A gelatinous
cube glides down a dungeon passage, unnoticed by
the adventurers until the cube engulfs one of them.
In these situations, one side of the battle gains
surprise over the other.
The GM determines who might be surprised. If
neither side tries to be stealthy, they automatically
notice each other. Otherwise, the GM compares the
Dexterity (Stealth) checks of anyone hiding with the
passive Wisdom (Perception) score of each creature
on the opposing side. Any character or monster that
doesn't notice a threat is surprised at the start of the
encounter.
If you're surprised, you can't move or take an
action on your first turn of the combat, and you can't
take a reaction until that turn ends. A member of a
group can be surprised even if the other members
aren't.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Initiative
Initiative determines the order of turns during
combat. When combat starts, every participant
makes a Dexterity check to determine their place in
the initiative order. The GM makes one roll for an
entire group of identical creatures, so each member of
the group acts at the same time.
The GM ranks the combatants in order from the
one with the highest Dexterity check total to the one
with the lowest. This is the order (called the
initiative order) in which they act during each round.
The initiative order remains the same from round to
round.
If a tie occurs, the GM decides the order among
tied GM-controlled creatures, and the players decide
the order among their tied characters. The GM can
decide the order if the tie is between a monster and
a player character. Optionally, the GM can have the
tied characters and monsters each roll a d20 to
determine the order, highest roll going first.
Your Turn
On your turn, you can move a distance up to your
speed and take one action. You decide whether to
move first or take your action first. Your speed-
sometimes called your walking speed-is noted on
your character sheet.
The most common actions you can take are
described in the "Actions in Combat" section. Many
class features and other abilities provide additional
options for your action.
The "Movement and Position" section gives the
rules for your move.
You can forgo moving, taking an action, or doing
anything at all on your turn. If you can't decide what
to do on your turn, consider taking the Dodge or
Ready action, as described in "Actions in Combat."
Bonus Actions
Various class features, spells, and other abilities let
you take an additional action on your turn called a
bonus action. The Cunning Action feature, for
example, allows a rogue to take a bonus action. You
can take a bonus action only when a special ability,
spell, or other feature of the game states that you can
do something as a bonus action. You otherwise don't
have a bonus action to take.
You can take only one bonus action on your turn,
so you must choose which bonus action to use when
you have more than one available.
You choose when to take a bonus action during
your turn, unless the bonus action's timing is
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 90

---

specified, and anything that deprives you of your
ability to take actions also prevents you from taking
a bonus action.
Other Activity on Your Turn
Your turn can include a variety of flourishes that
require neither your action nor your move.
You can communicate however you are able,
through brief utterances and gestures, as you take
your turn.
You can also interact with one object or feature of
the environment for free, during either your move or
your action. For example, you could open a door
during your move as you stride toward a foe, or you
could draw your weapon as part of the same action
you use to attack.
If you want to interact with a second object, you
need to use your action. Some magic items and other
special objects always require an action to use, as
stated in their descriptions.
The GM might require you to use an action for any
of these activities when it needs special care or when
it presents an unusual obstacle. For instance, the GM
could reasonably expect you to use an action to open
a stuck door or turn a crank to lower a drawbridge.
Reactions
Certain special abilities, spells, and situations allow
you to take a special action called a reaction. A
reaction is an instant response to a trigger of some
kind, which can occur on your turn or on someone
else's. The opportunity attack is the most common
type of reaction.
When you take a reaction, you can't take another
one until the start of your next turn. If the reaction
interrupts another creature's turn, that creature can
continue its turn right after the reaction.
Movement and Position
In combat, characters and monsters are in constant
motion, often using movement and position to gain
the upper hand.
On your turn, you can move a distance up to your
speed. You can use as much or as little of your speed
as you like on your turn, following the rules here.
Your movement can include jumping, climbing,
and swimming. These different modes of movement
can be combined with walking, or they can
constitute your entire move. However you're moving,
you deduct the distance of each part of your move
from your speed until it is used up or until you are
done moving.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Breaking Up Your Move
You can break up your movement on your turn,
using some of your speed before and after your
action. For example, if you have a speed of 30 feet,
you can move 10 feet, take your action, and then
move 20 feet.
Moving between Attacks
If you take an action that includes more than one
weapon attack, you can break up your movement
even further by moving between those attacks. For
example, a fighter who can make two attacks with
the Extra Attack feature and who has a speed of 25
feet could move 10 feet, make an attack, move 15
feet, and then attack again.
Using Different Speeds
If you have more than one speed, such as your
walking speed and a flying speed, you can switch
back and forth between your speeds during your
move. Whenever you switch, subtract the distance
you've already moved from the new speed. The
result determines how much farther you can move.
If the result is 0 or less, you can't use the new speed
during the current move.
For example, if you have a speed of 30 and a flying
speed of 60 because a wizard cast the fly spell on you,
you could fly 20 feet, then walk 10 feet, and then
leap into the air to fly 30 feet more.
Difficult Terrain
Combat rarely takes place in bare rooms or on
featureless plains. Boulder-strewn caverns, briar-
choked forests, treacherous staircases-the setting
of a typical fight contains difficult terrain.
Every foot of movement in difficult terrain costs 1
extra foot. This rule is true even if multiple things in
a space count as difficult terrain.
Low furniture, rubble, undergrowth, steep stairs,
snow, and shallow bogs are examples of difficult
terrain. The space of another creature, whether
hostile or not, also counts as difficult terrain.
Being Prone
Combatants often find themselves lying on the
ground, either because they are knocked down or
because they throw themselves down. In the game,
they are prone, a condition described in appendix
PH-A.
You can drop prone without using any of your
speed. Standing up takes more effort; doing so costs
an amount of movement equal to half your speed.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 91

---

For example, if your speed is 30 feet, you must spend
15 feet of movement to stand up. You can't stand up
if you don't have enough movement left or if your
speed is 0.
To move while prone, you must crawl or use
magic such as teleportation. Every foot of movement
while crawling costs 1 extra foot. Crawling 1 foot in
difficult terrain, therefore, costs 3 feet of movement.
Interacting with Objects Around You
Here are a few examples of the sorts of thing you can do in
tandem with your movement and action:
 draw or sheathe a sword
 open or close a door
 withdraw a potion from your backpack
 pick up a dropped axe
 take a bauble from a table
 remove a ring from your finger
 stuff some food into your mouth
 plant a banner in the ground
 fish a few coins from your belt pouch
 drink all the ale in a flagon
 throw a lever or a switch
 pull a torch from a sconce
 take a book from a shelf you can reach
 extinguish a small flame
 don a mask
 pull the hood of your cloak up and over your head
 put your ear to a door
 kick a small stone
 turn a key in a lock
 tap the floor with a 10-foot pole
 hand an item to another character
Moving Around Other Creatures
You can move through a nonhostile creature's space.
In contrast, you can move through a hostile
creature's space only if the creature is at least two
sizes larger or smaller than you. Remember that
another creature's space is difficult terrain for you.
Whether a creature is a friend or an enemy, you
can't willingly end your move in its space.
If you leave a hostile creature's reach during your
move, you provoke an opportunity attack.
Flying Movement
Flying creatures enjoy many benefits of mobility, but
they must also deal with the danger of falling. If a
flying creature is knocked prone, has its speed
reduced to 0, or is otherwise deprived of the ability
to move, the creature falls, unless it has the ability to
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

hover or it is being held aloft by magic, such as by
the fly spell.
Creature Size
Each creature takes up a different amount of space.
The Size Categories table shows how much space a
creature of a particular size controls in combat.
Objects sometimes use the same size categories.
Size Categories
Size Space
Tiny 2 by 2 ft.
Small 5 by 5 ft.
Medium 5 by 5 ft.
Large 10 by 10 ft.
Huge 15 by 15 ft.
Gargantuan 20 by 20 ft. or larger
Space
A creature's space is the area in feet that it
effectively controls in combat, not an expression of
its physical dimensions. A typical Medium creature
isn't 5 feet wide, for example, but it does control a
space that wide. If a Medium hobgoblin stands in a 5-
foot-wide doorway, other creatures can't get
through unless the hobgoblin lets them.
A creature's space also reflects the area it needs to
fight effectively. For that reason, there's a limit to the
number of creatures that can surround another
creature in combat. Assuming Medium combatants,
eight creatures can fit in a 5-foot radius around
another one.
Because larger creatures take up more space,
fewer of them can surround a creature. If five Large
creatures crowd around a Medium or smaller one,
there's little room for anyone else. In contrast, as
many as twenty Medium creatures can surround a
Gargantuan one.
Squeezing into a Smaller Space
A creature can squeeze through a space that is large
enough for a creature one size smaller than it. Thus,
a Large creature can squeeze through a passage
that's only 5 feet wide. While squeezing through a
space, a creature must spend 1 extra foot for every
foot it moves there, and it has disadvantage on
attack rolls and Dexterity saving throws. Attack rolls
against the creature have advantage while it's in the
smaller space.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 92

---

Actions in Combat
When you take your action on your turn, you can
take one of the actions presented here, an action you
gained from your class or a special feature, or an
action that you improvise. Many monsters have
action options of their own in their stat blocks.
When you describe an action not detailed
elsewhere in the rules, the GM tells you whether that
action is possible and what kind of roll you need to
make, if any, to determine success or failure.
Attack
The most common action to take in combat is the
Attack action, whether you are swinging a sword,
firing an arrow from a bow, or brawling with your
fists.
With this action, you make one melee or ranged
attack. See the "Making an Attack" section for the
rules that govern attacks.
Certain features, such as the Extra Attack feature
of the fighter, allow you to make more than one
attack with this action.
Cast a Spell
Spellcasters such as wizards and clerics, as well as
many monsters, have access to spells and can use
them to great effect in combat. Each spell has a
casting time, which specifies whether the caster
must use an action, a reaction, minutes, or even
hours to cast the spell. Casting a spell is, therefore,
not necessarily an action. Most spells do have a
casting time of 1 action, so a spellcaster often uses
his or her action in combat to cast such a spell.
Dash
When you take the Dash action, you gain extra
movement for the current turn. The increase equals
your speed, after applying any modifiers. With a
speed of 30 feet, for example, you can move up to 60
feet on your turn if you dash.
Any increase or decrease to your speed changes
this additional movement by the same amount. If
your speed of 30 feet is reduced to 15 feet, for
instance, you can move up to 30 feet this turn if you
dash.
Disengage
If you take the Disengage action, your movement
doesn't provoke opportunity attacks for the rest of
the turn.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Dodge
When you take the Dodge action, you focus entirely
on avoiding attacks. Until the start of your next turn,
any attack roll made against you has disadvantage if
you can see the attacker, and you make Dexterity
saving throws with advantage. You lose this benefit
if you are incapacitated (as explained in appendix
PH-A) or if your speed drops to 0.
Help
You can lend your aid to another creature in the
completion of a task. When you take the Help action,
the creature you aid gains advantage on the next
ability check it makes to perform the task you are
helping with, provided that it makes the check
before the start of your next turn.
Alternatively, you can aid a friendly creature in
attacking a creature within 5 feet of you. You feint,
distract the target, or in some other way team up to
make your ally's attack more effective. If your ally
attacks the target before your next turn, the first
attack roll is made with advantage.
Hide
When you take the Hide action, you make a Dexterity
(Stealth) check in an attempt to hide, following the
rules for hiding. If you succeed, you gain certain
benefits, as described in the "Unseen Attackers and
Targets" section.
Ready
Sometimes you want to get the jump on a foe or wait
for a particular circumstance before you act. To do
so, you can take the Ready action on your turn,
which lets you act using your reaction before the
start of your next turn.
First, you decide what perceivable circumstance
will trigger your reaction. Then, you choose the
action you will take in response to that trigger, or
you choose to move up to your speed in response to
it. Examples include "If the cultist steps on the
trapdoor, I'll pull the lever that opens it," and "If the
goblin steps next to me, I move away."
When the trigger occurs, you can either take your
reaction right after the trigger finishes or ignore the
trigger. Remember that you can take only one
reaction per round.
When you ready a spell, you cast it as normal but
hold its energy, which you release with your
reaction when the trigger occurs. To be readied, a
spell must have a casting time of 1 action, and
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 93

---

holding onto the spell's magic requires
concentration. If your concentration is broken, the
spell dissipates without taking effect. For example, if
you are concentrating on the web spell and ready
magic missile, your web spell ends, and if you take
damage before you release magic missile with your
reaction, your concentration might be broken.
Search
When you take the Search action, you devote your
attention to finding something. Depending on the
nature of your search, the GM might have you make
a Wisdom (Perception) check or an Intelligence
(Investigation) check.
Use an Object
You normally interact with an object while doing
something else, such as when you draw a sword as
part of an attack. When an object requires your
action for its use, you take the Use an Object action.
This action is also useful when you want to interact
with more than one object on your turn.
Making an Attack
Whether you're striking with a melee weapon, firing
a weapon at range, or making an attack roll as part
of a spell, an attack has a simple structure.
1. Choose a target. Pick a target within your attack's
range: a creature, an object, or a location.
2. Determine modifiers. The GM determines
whether the target has cover and whether you
have advantage or disadvantage against the target.
In addition, spells, special abilities, and other
effects can apply penalties or bonuses to your
attack roll.
3. Resolve the attack. You make the attack roll. On a
hit, you roll damage, unless the particular attack
has rules that specify otherwise. Some attacks
cause special effects in addition to or instead of
damage.
If there's ever any question whether something
you're doing counts as an attack, the rule is simple: if
you're making an attack roll, you're making an attack.
Attack Rolls
When you make an attack, your attack roll
determines whether the attack hits or misses. To
make an attack roll, roll a d20 and add the
appropriate modifiers. If the total of the roll plus
modifiers equals or exceeds the target's Armor Class
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

(AC), the attack hits. The AC of a character is
determined at character creation, whereas the AC of
a monster is in its stat block.
Modifiers to the Roll
When a character makes an attack roll, the two most
common modifiers to the roll are an ability modifier
and the character's proficiency bonus. When a
monster makes an attack roll, it uses whatever
modifier is provided in its stat block.
Ability Modifier. The ability modifier used for a
melee weapon attack is Strength, and the ability
modifier used for a ranged weapon attack is
Dexterity. Weapons that have the finesse or thrown
property break this rule.
Some spells also require an attack roll. The ability
modifier used for a spell attack depends on the
spellcasting ability of the spellcaster.
Proficiency Bonus. You add your proficiency
bonus to your attack roll when you attack using a
weapon with which you have proficiency, as well as
when you attack with a spell.
Rolling 1 or 20
Sometimes fate blesses or curses a combatant,
causing the novice to hit and the veteran to miss.
If the d20 roll for an attack is a 20, the attack hits
regardless of any modifiers or the target's AC. This is
called a critical hit.
If the d20 roll for an attack is a 1, the attack misses
regardless of any modifiers or the target's AC.
Unseen Attackers and Targets
Combatants often try to escape their foes' notice by
hiding, casting the invisibility spell, or lurking in
darkness.
When you attack a target that you can't see, you
have disadvantage on the attack roll. This is true
whether you're guessing the target's location or
you're targeting a creature you can hear but not see.
If the target isn't in the location you targeted, you
automatically miss, but the GM typically just says
that the attack missed, not whether you guessed the
target's location correctly.
When a creature can't see you, you have
advantage on attack rolls against it. If you are
hidden-both unseen and unheard-when you
make an attack, you give away your location when
the attack hits or misses.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 94

---

Ranged Attacks
When you make a ranged attack, you fire a bow or a
crossbow, hurl a handaxe, or otherwise send
projectiles to strike a foe at a distance. A monster
might shoot spines from its tail. Many spells also
involve making a ranged attack.
Range
You can make ranged attacks only against targets
within a specified range.
If a ranged attack, such as one made with a spell,
has a single range, you can't attack a target beyond
this range.
Some ranged attacks, such as those made with a
longbow or a shortbow, have two ranges. The
smaller number is the normal range, and the larger
number is the long range. Your attack roll has
disadvantage when your target is beyond normal
range, and you can't attack a target beyond the long
range.
Ranged Attacks in Close Combat
Aiming a ranged attack is more difficult when a foe is
next to you. When you make a ranged attack with a
weapon, a spell, or some other means, you have
disadvantage on the attack roll if you are within 5
feet of a hostile creature who can see you and who
isn't incapacitated.
Melee Attacks
Used in hand-to-hand combat, a melee attack allows
you to attack a foe within your reach. A melee attack
typically uses a handheld weapon such as a sword, a
warhammer, or an axe. A typical monster makes a
melee attack when it strikes with its claws, horns,
teeth, tentacles, or other body part. A few spells also
involve making a melee attack.
Most creatures have a 5-foot reach and can thus
attack targets within 5 feet of them when making a
melee attack. Certain creatures (typically those
larger than Medium) have melee attacks with a
greater reach than 5 feet, as noted in their
descriptions.
Instead of using a weapon to make a melee
weapon attack, you can use an unarmed strike: a
punch, kick, head-butt, or similar forceful blow
(none of which count as weapons). On a hit, an
unarmed strike deals bludgeoning damage equal to 1
+ your Strength modifier. You are proficient with
your unarmed strikes.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Opportunity Attacks
In a fight, everyone is constantly watching for a
chance to strike an enemy who is fleeing or passing
by. Such a strike is called an opportunity attack.
You can make an opportunity attack when a
hostile creature that you can see moves out of your
reach. To make the opportunity attack, you use your
reaction to make one melee attack against the
provoking creature. The attack occurs right before
the creature leaves your reach.
You can avoid provoking an opportunity attack by
taking the Disengage action. You also don't provoke
an opportunity attack when you teleport or when
someone or something moves you without using
your movement, action, or reaction. For example,
you don't provoke an opportunity attack if an
explosion hurls you out of a foe's reach or if gravity
causes you to fall past an enemy.
Two-Weapon Fighting
When you take the Attack action and attack with a
light melee weapon that you're holding in one hand,
you can use a bonus action to attack with a different
light melee weapon that you're holding in the other
hand. You don't add your ability modifier to the
damage of the bonus attack, unless that modifier is
negative.
If either weapon has the thrown property, you can
throw the weapon, instead of making a melee attack
with it.
Grappling
When you want to grab a creature or wrestle with it,
you can use the Attack action to make a special
melee attack, a grapple. If you're able to make
multiple attacks with the Attack action, this attack
replaces one of them.
The target of your grapple must be no more than
one size larger than you and must be within your
reach. Using at least one free hand, you try to seize
the target by making a grapple check instead of an
attack roll: a Strength (Athletics) check contested by
the target's Strength (Athletics) or Dexterity
(Acrobatics) check (the target chooses the ability to
use). If you succeed, you subject the target to the
grappled condition (see appendix PH-A). The
condition specifies the things that end it, and you can
release the target whenever you like (no action
required).
Escaping a Grapple. A grappled creature can use
its action to escape. To do so, it must succeed on a
Strength (Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check
contested by your Strength (Athletics) check.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 95

---

Moving a Grappled Creature. When you move,
you can drag or carry the grappled creature with you,
but your speed is halved, unless the creature is two
or more sizes smaller than you.
Contests in Combat
Battle often involves pitting your prowess against that of
your foe. Such a challenge is represented by a contest. This
section includes the most common contests that require an
action in combat: grappling and shoving a creature. The GM
can use these contests as models for improvising others.
Shoving a Creature
Using the Attack action, you can make a special
melee attack to shove a creature, either to knock it
prone or push it away from you. If you're able to
make multiple attacks with the Attack action, this
attack replaces one of them.
The target must be no more than one size larger
than you and must be within your reach. Instead of
making an attack roll, you make a Strength
(Athletics) check contested by the target's Strength
(Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check (the
target chooses the ability to use). If you win the
contest, you either knock the target prone or push it
5 feet away from you.
Cover
Walls, trees, creatures, and other obstacles can
provide cover during combat, making a target more
difficult to harm. A target can benefit from cover
only when an attack or other effect originates on the
opposite side of the cover.
There are three degrees of cover. If a target is
behind multiple sources of cover, only the most
protective degree of cover applies; the degrees
aren't added together. For example, if a target is
behind a creature that gives half cover and a tree
trunk that gives three-quarters cover, the target has
three-quarters cover.
A target with half cover has a +2 bonus to AC and
Dexterity saving throws. A target has half cover if an
obstacle blocks at least half of its body. The obstacle
might be a low wall, a large piece of furniture, a
narrow tree trunk, or a creature, whether that
creature is an enemy or a friend.
A target with three-quarters cover has a +5
bonus to AC and Dexterity saving throws. A target
has three-quarters cover if about three-quarters of it
is covered by an obstacle. The obstacle might be a
portcullis, an arrow slit, or a thick tree trunk.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

A target with total cover can't be targeted directly
by an attack or a spell, although some spells can
reach such a target by including it in an area of effect.
A target has total cover if it is completely concealed
by an obstacle.
Damage and Healing
Injury and the risk of death are constant companions
of those who explore fantasy gaming worlds. The
thrust of a sword, a well-placed arrow, or a blast of
flame from a fireball spell all have the potential to
damage, or even kill, the hardiest of creatures.
Hit Points
Hit points represent a combination of physical and
mental durability, the will to live, and luck. Creatures
with more hit points are more difficult to kill. Those
with fewer hit points are more fragile.
A creature's current hit points (usually just called
hit points) can be any number from the creature's hit
point maximum down to 0. This number changes
frequently as a creature takes damage or receives
healing.
Whenever a creature takes damage, that damage is
subtracted from its hit points. The loss of hit points
has no effect on a creature's capabilities until the
creature drops to 0 hit points.
Damage Rolls
Each weapon, spell, and harmful monster ability
specifies the damage it deals. You roll the damage
die or dice, add any modifiers, and apply the damage
to your target. Magic weapons, special abilities, and
other factors can grant a bonus to damage. With a
penalty, it is possible to deal 0 damage, but never
negative damage.
When attacking with a weapon, you add your
ability modifier-the same modifier used for the
attack roll-to the damage. A spell tells you which
dice to roll for damage and whether to add any
modifiers.
If a spell or other effect deals damage to more
than one target at the same time, roll the damage
once for all of them. For example, when a wizard
casts fireball or a cleric casts flame strike, the spell's
damage is rolled once for all creatures caught in the
blast.
Critical Hits
When you score a critical hit, you get to roll extra
dice for the attack's damage against the target. Roll
all of the attack's damage dice twice and add them
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 96

---

together. Then add any relevant modifiers as normal.
To speed up play, you can roll all the damage dice at
once.
For example, if you score a critical hit with a
dagger, roll 2d4 for the damage, rather than 1d4, and
then add your relevant ability modifier. If the attack
involves other damage dice, such as from the rogue's
Sneak Attack feature, you roll those dice twice as
well.
Damage Types
Different attacks, damaging spells, and other harmful
effects deal different types of damage. Damage types
have no rules of their own, but other rules, such as
damage resistance, rely on the types.
The damage types follow, with examples to help a
GM assign a damage type to a new effect.
Acid. The corrosive spray of a black dragon's
breath and the dissolving enzymes secreted by a
black pudding deal acid damage.
Bludgeoning. Blunt force attacks-hammers,
falling, constriction, and the like-deal bludgeoning
damage.
Cold. The infernal chill radiating from an ice
devil's spear and the frigid blast of a white dragon's
breath deal cold damage.
Fire. Red dragons breathe fire, and many spells
conjure flames to deal fire damage.
Force. Force is pure magical energy focused into a
damaging form. Most effects that deal force damage
are spells, including magic missile and spiritual
weapon.
Lightning. A lightning bolt spell and a blue
dragon's breath deal lightning damage.
Necrotic. Necrotic damage, dealt by certain
undead and a spell such as chill touch, withers
matter and even the soul.
Piercing. Puncturing and impaling attacks,
including spears and monsters' bites, deal piercing
damage.
Poison. Venomous stings and the toxic gas of a
green dragon's breath deal poison damage.
Psychic. Mental abilities such as a mind flayer's
psionic blast deal psychic damage.
Radiant. Radiant damage, dealt by a cleric's flame
strike spell or an angel's smiting weapon, sears the
flesh like fire and overloads the spirit with power.
Slashing. Swords, axes, and monsters' claws deal
slashing damage.
Thunder. A concussive burst of sound, such as the
effect of the thunderwave spell, deals thunder
damage.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Damage Resistance and
Vulnerability
Some creatures and objects are exceedingly difficult
or unusually easy to hurt with certain types of
damage.
If a creature or an object has resistance to a
damage type, damage of that type is halved against it.
If a creature or an object has vulnerability to a
damage type, damage of that type is doubled against
it.
Resistance and then vulnerability are applied after
all other modifiers to damage. For example, a
creature has resistance to bludgeoning damage and
is hit by an attack that deals 25 bludgeoning damage.
The creature is also within a magical aura that
reduces all damage by 5. The 25 damage is first
reduced by 5 and then halved, so the creature takes
10 damage.
Multiple instances of resistance or vulnerability
that affect the same damage type count as only one
instance. For example, if a creature has resistance to
fire damage as well as resistance to all nonmagical
damage, the damage of a nonmagical fire is reduced
by half against the creature, not reduced by three-
quarters.
Healing
Unless it results in death, damage isn't permanent.
Even death is reversible through powerful magic.
Rest can restore a creature's hit points, and magical
methods such as a cure wounds spell or a potion of
healing can remove damage in an instant.
When a creature receives healing of any kind, hit
points regained are added to its current hit points. A
creature's hit points can't exceed its hit point
maximum, so any hit points regained in excess of
this number are lost. For example, a druid grants a
ranger 8 hit points of healing. If the ranger has 14
current hit points and has a hit point maximum of 20,
the ranger regains 6 hit points from the druid, not 8.
A creature that has died can't regain hit points
until magic such as the revivify spell has restored it
to life.
Dropping to 0 Hit Points
When you drop to 0 hit points, you either die
outright or fall unconscious, as explained in the
following sections.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 97

---

Instant Death
Massive damage can kill you instantly. When damage
reduces you to 0 hit points and there is damage
remaining, you die if the remaining damage equals
or exceeds your hit point maximum.
For example, a cleric with a maximum of 12 hit
points currently has 6 hit points. If she takes 18
damage from an attack, she is reduced to 0 hit points,
but 12 damage remains. Because the remaining
damage equals her hit point maximum, the cleric
dies.
Falling Unconscious
If damage reduces you to 0 hit points and fails to kill
you, you fall unconscious (see appendix PH-A). This
unconsciousness ends if you regain any hit points.
Death Saving Throws
Whenever you start your turn with 0 hit points, you
must make a special saving throw, called a death
saving throw, to determine whether you creep closer
to death or hang onto life. Unlike other saving
throws, this one isn't tied to any ability score. You
are in the hands of fate now, aided only by spells and
features that improve your chances of succeeding on
a saving throw.
Roll a d20. If the roll is 10 or higher, you succeed.
Otherwise, you fail. A success or failure has no effect
by itself. On your third success, you become stable
(see below). On your third failure, you die. The
successes and failures don't need to be consecutive;
keep track of both until you collect three of a kind.
The number of both is reset to zero when you regain
any hit points or become stable.
Rolling 1 or 20. When you make a death saving
throw and roll a 1 on the d20, it counts as two
failures. If you roll a 20 on the d20, you regain 1 hit
point.
Damage at 0 Hit Points. If you take any damage
while you have 0 hit points, you suffer a death saving
throw failure. If the damage is from a critical hit, you
suffer two failures instead. If the damage equals or
exceeds your hit point maximum, you suffer instant
death.
Stabilizing a Creature
The best way to save a creature with 0 hit points is
to heal it. If healing is unavailable, the creature can
at least be stabilized so that it isn't killed by a failed
death saving throw.
You can use your action to administer first aid to
an unconscious creature and attempt to stabilize it,
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

which requires a successful DC 10 Wisdom
(Medicine) check.
A stable creature doesn't make death saving
throws, even though it has 0 hit points, but it does
remain unconscious. The creature stops being stable,
and must start making death saving throws again, if
it takes any damage. A stable creature that isn't
healed regains 1 hit point after 1d4 hours.
Monsters and Death
Most GMs have a monster die the instant it drops to
0 hit points, rather than having it fall unconscious
and make death saving throws.
Mighty villains and special nonplayer characters
are common exceptions; the GM might have them
fall unconscious and follow the same rules as player
characters.
Knocking a Creature Out
Sometimes an attacker wants to incapacitate a foe,
rather than deal a killing blow. When an attacker
reduces a creature to 0 hit points with a melee attack,
the attacker can knock the creature out. The attacker
can make this choice the instant the damage is dealt.
The creature falls unconscious and is stable.
Temporary Hit Points
Some spells and special abilities confer temporary
hit points to a creature. Temporary hit points aren't
actual hit points; they are a buffer against damage, a
pool of hit points that protect you from injury.
When you have temporary hit points and take
damage, the temporary hit points are lost first, and
any leftover damage carries over to your normal hit
points. For example, if you have 5 temporary hit
points and take 7 damage, you lose the temporary
hit points and then take 2 damage.
Because temporary hit points are separate from
your actual hit points, they can exceed your hit point
maximum. A character can, therefore, be at full hit
points and receive temporary hit points.
Healing can't restore temporary hit points, and
they can't be added together. If you have temporary
hit points and receive more of them, you decide
whether to keep the ones you have or to gain the
new ones. For example, if a spell grants you 12
temporary hit points when you already have 10, you
can have 12 or 10, not 22.
If you have 0 hit points, receiving temporary hit
points doesn't restore you to consciousness or
stabilize you. They can still absorb damage directed
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 98

---

at you while you're in that state, but only true
healing can save you.
Unless a feature that grants you temporary hit
points has a duration, they last until they're depleted
or you finish a long rest.
Mounted Combat
A knight charging into battle on a warhorse, a wizard
casting spells from the back of a griffon, or a cleric
soaring through the sky on a pegasus all enjoy the
benefits of speed and mobility that a mount can
provide.
A willing creature that is at least one size larger
than you and that has an appropriate anatomy can
serve as a mount, using the following rules.
Mounting and Dismounting
Once during your move, you can mount a creature
that is within 5 feet of you or dismount. Doing so
costs an amount of movement equal to half your
speed. For example, if your speed is 30 feet, you
must spend 15 feet of movement to mount a horse.
Therefore, you can't mount it if you don't have 15
feet of movement left or if your speed is 0.
If an effect moves your mount against its will
while you're on it, you must succeed on a DC 10
Dexterity saving throw or fall off the mount, landing
prone in a space within 5 feet of it. If you're knocked
prone while mounted, you must make the same
saving throw.
If your mount is knocked prone, you can use your
reaction to dismount it as it falls and land on your
feet. Otherwise, you are dismounted and fall prone
in a space within 5 feet it.
Controlling a Mount
While you're mounted, you have two options. You
can either control the mount or allow it to act
independently. Intelligent creatures, such as dragons,
act independently.
You can control a mount only if it has been trained
to accept a rider. Domesticated horses, donkeys, and
similar creatures are assumed to have such training.
The initiative of a controlled mount changes to
match yours when you mount it. It moves as you
direct it, and it has only three action options: Dash,
Disengage, and Dodge. A controlled mount can move
and act even on the turn that you mount it.
An independent mount retains its place in the
initiative order. Bearing a rider puts no restrictions
on the actions the mount can take, and it moves and
acts as it wishes. It might flee from combat, rush to
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

attack and devour a badly injured foe, or otherwise
act against your wishes.
In either case, if the mount provokes an
opportunity attack while you're on it, the attacker
can target you or the mount.
Underwater Combat
When adventurers pursue sahuagin back to their
undersea homes, fight off sharks in an ancient
shipwreck, or find themselves in a flooded dungeon
room, they must fight in a challenging environment.
Underwater the following rules apply.
When making a melee weapon attack, a creature
that doesn't have a swimming speed (either natural
or granted by magic) has disadvantage on the attack
roll unless the weapon is a dagger, javelin,
shortsword, spear, or trident.
A ranged weapon attack automatically misses a
target beyond the weapon's normal range. Even
against a target within normal range, the attack roll
has disadvantage unless the weapon is a crossbow, a
net, or a weapon that is thrown like a javelin
(including a spear, trident, or dart).
Creatures and objects that are fully immersed in
water have resistance to fire damage.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 99

---

Spellcasting
Magic permeates fantasy gaming worlds and often
appears in the form of a spell.
This section provides the rules for casting spells.
Different character classes have distinctive ways of
learning and preparing their spells, and monsters
use spells in unique ways. Regardless of its source, a
spell follows the rules here.
What Is a Spell?
A spell is a discrete magical effect, a single shaping of
the magical energies that suffuse the multiverse into
a specific, limited expression. In casting a spell, a
character carefully plucks at the invisible strands of
raw magic suffusing the world, pins them in place in
a particular pattern, sets them vibrating in a specific
way, and then releases them to unleash the desired
effect-in most cases, all in the span of seconds.
Spells can be versatile tools, weapons, or
protective wards. They can deal damage or undo it,
impose or remove conditions (see appendix PH-A),
drain life energy away, and restore life to the dead.
Uncounted thousands of spells have been created
over the course of the multiverse's history, and
many of them are long forgotten. Some might yet lie
recorded in crumbling spellbooks hidden in ancient
ruins or trapped in the minds of dead gods. Or they
might someday be reinvented by a character who
has amassed enough power and wisdom to do so.
Spell Level
Every spell has a level from 0 to 9. A spell's level is a
general indicator of how powerful it is, with the
lowly (but still impressive) magic missile at 1st level
and the earth-shaking wish at 9th. Cantrips-simple
but powerful spells that characters can cast almost
by rote-are level 0. The higher a spell's level, the
higher level a spellcaster must be to use that spell.
Spell level and character level don't correspond
directly. Typically, a character has to be at least 17th
level, not 9th level, to cast a 9th-level spell.
Known and Prepared Spells
Before a spellcaster can use a spell, he or she must
have the spell firmly fixed in mind, or must have
access to the spell in a magic item. Members of a few
classes, including bards and sorcerers, have a limited
list of spells they know that are always fixed in mind.
The same thing is true of many magic-using
monsters. Other spellcasters, such as clerics and
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

wizards, undergo a process of preparing spells. This
process varies for different classes, as detailed in
their descriptions.
In every case, the number of spells a caster can
have fixed in mind at any given time depends on the
character's level.
Spell Slots
Regardless of how many spells a caster knows or
prepares, he or she can cast only a limited number of
spells before resting. Manipulating the fabric of
magic and channeling its energy into even a simple
spell is physically and mentally taxing, and higher-
level spells are even more so. Thus, each spellcasting
class's description (except that of the warlock)
includes a table showing how many spell slots of
each spell level a character can use at each character
level. For example, the 3rd-level wizard Umara has
four 1st-level spell slots and two 2nd-level slots.
When a character casts a spell, he or she expends a
slot of that spell's level or higher, effectively "filling"
a slot with the spell. You can think of a spell slot as a
groove of a certain size-small for a 1st-level slot,
larger for a spell of higher level. A 1st-level spell fits
into a slot of any size, but a 9th-level spell fits only in
a 9th-level slot. So when Umara casts magic missile, a
1st-level spell, she spends one of her four 1st-level
slots and has three remaining.
Finishing a long rest restores any expended spell
slots.
Some characters and monsters have special
abilities that let them cast spells without using spell
slots. For example, a monk who follows the Way of
the Four Elements, a warlock who chooses certain
eldritch invocations, and a pit fiend from the Nine
Hells can all cast spells in such a way.
Casting a Spell at a Higher Level
When a spellcaster casts a spell using a slot that is of
a higher level than the spell, the spell assumes the
higher level for that casting. For instance, if Umara
casts magic missile using one of her 2nd-level slots,
that magic missile is 2nd level. Effectively, the spell
expands to fill the slot it is put into.
Some spells, such as magic missile and cure
wounds, have more powerful effects when cast at a
higher level, as detailed in a spell's description.
Casting in Armor
Because of the mental focus and precise gestures required
for spellcasting, you must be proficient with the armor you
are wearing to cast a spell. You are otherwise too distracted
and physically hampered by your armor for spellcasting.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 100

---

Cantrips
A cantrip is a spell that can be cast at will, without
using a spell slot and without being prepared in
advance. Repeated practice has fixed the spell in the
caster's mind and infused the caster with the magic
needed to produce the effect over and over. A
cantrip's spell level is 0.
Rituals
Certain spells have a special tag: ritual. Such a spell
can be cast following the normal rules for
spellcasting, or the spell can be cast as a ritual. The
ritual version of a spell takes 10 minutes longer to
cast than normal. It also doesn't expend a spell slot,
which means the ritual version of a spell can't be
cast at a higher level.
To cast a spell as a ritual, a spellcaster must have a
feature that grants the ability to do so. The cleric and
the druid, for example, have such a feature. The
caster must also have the spell prepared or on his or
her list of spells known, unless the character's ritual
feature specifies otherwise, as the wizard's does.
Casting a Spell
When a character casts any spell, the same basic
rules are followed, regardless of the character's class
or the spell's effects.
Each spell description begins with a block of
information, including the spell's name, level, school
of magic, casting time, range, components, and
duration. The rest of a spell entry describes the
spell's effect.
Casting Time
Most spells require a single action to cast, but some
spells require a bonus action, a reaction, or much
more time to cast.
Bonus Action
A spell cast with a bonus action is especially swift.
You must use a bonus action on your turn to cast the
spell, provided that you haven't already taken a
bonus action this turn. You can't cast another spell
during the same turn, except for a cantrip with a
casting time of 1 action.
Reactions
Some spells can be cast as reactions. These spells
take a fraction of a second to bring about and are
cast in response to some event. If a spell can be cast
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

as a reaction, the spell description tells you exactly
when you can do so.
Longer Casting Times
Certain spells (including spells cast as rituals)
require more time to cast: minutes or even hours.
When you cast a spell with a casting time longer
than a single action or reaction, you must spend your
action each turn casting the spell, and you must
maintain your concentration while you do so (see
"Concentration" below). If your concentration is
broken, the spell fails, but you don't expend a spell
slot. If you want to try casting the spell again, you
must start over.
Range
The target of a spell must be within the spell's range.
For a spell like magic missile, the target is a creature.
For a spell like fireball, the target is the point in
space where the ball of fire erupts.
Most spells have ranges expressed in feet. Some
spells can target only a creature (including you) that
you touch. Other spells, such as the shield spell, affect
only you. These spells have a range of self.
Spells that create cones or lines of effect that
originate from you also have a range of self,
indicating that the origin point of the spell's effect
must be you (see "Areas of Effect").
Once a spell is cast, its effects aren't limited by its
range, unless the spell's description says otherwise.
Components
A spell's components are the physical requirements
you must meet in order to cast it. Each spell's
description indicates whether it requires verbal (V),
somatic (S), or material (M) components. If you can't
provide one or more of a spell's components, you are
unable to cast the spell.
Verbal (V)
Most spells require the chanting of mystic words.
The words themselves aren't the source of the spell's
power; rather, the particular combination of sounds,
with specific pitch and resonance, sets the threads of
magic in motion. Thus, a character who is gagged or
in an area of silence, such as one created by the
silence spell, can't cast a spell with a verbal
component.
Somatic (S)
Spellcasting gestures might include a forceful
gesticulation or an intricate set of gestures. If a spell
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 101

---

requires a somatic component, the caster must have
free use of at least one hand to perform these gestures.
Material (M)
Casting some spells requires particular objects,
specified in parentheses in the component entry. A
character can use a component pouch or a
spellcasting focus (found in "Equipment") in place
of the components specified for a spell. But if a cost
is indicated for a component, a character must have
that specific component before he or she can cast the
spell.
If a spell states that a material component is
consumed by the spell, the caster must provide this
component for each casting of the spell.
A spellcaster must have a hand free to access a
spell's material components-or to hold a
spellcasting focus-but it can be the same hand that
he or she uses to perform somatic components.
Duration
A spell's duration is the length of time the spell
persists. A duration can be expressed in rounds,
minutes, hours, or even years. Some spells specify
that their effects last until the spells are dispelled or
destroyed.
Instantaneous
Many spells are instantaneous. The spell harms,
heals, creates, or alters a creature or an object in a
way that can't be dispelled, because its magic exists
only for an instant.
Concentration
Some spells require you to maintain concentration in
order to keep their magic active. If you lose
concentration, such a spell ends.
If a spell must be maintained with concentration,
that fact appears in its Duration entry, and the spell
specifies how long you can concentrate on it. You
can end concentration at any time (no action
required).
Normal activity, such as moving and attacking,
doesn't interfere with concentration. The following
factors can break concentration:
 Casting another spell that requires
concentration. You lose concentration on a spell
if you cast another spell that requires
concentration. You can't concentrate on two spells
at once.
 Taking damage. Whenever you take damage
while you are concentrating on a spell, you must
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

make a Constitution saving throw to maintain
your concentration. The DC equals 10 or half the
damage you take, whichever number is higher. If
you take damage from multiple sources, such as an
arrow and a dragon's breath, you make a separate
saving throw for each source of damage.
 Being incapacitated or killed. You lose
concentration on a spell if you are incapacitated or
if you die.
The GM might also decide that certain
environmental phenomena, such as a wave crashing
over you while you're on a storm-tossed ship,
require you to succeed on a DC 10 Constitution
saving throw to maintain concentration on a spell.
Targets
A typical spell requires you to pick one or more
targets to be affected by the spell's magic. A spell's
description tells you whether the spell targets
creatures, objects, or a point of origin for an area of
effect (described below).
Unless a spell has a perceptible effect, a creature
might not know it was targeted by a spell at all. An
effect like crackling lightning is obvious, but a more
subtle effect, such as an attempt to read a creature's
thoughts, typically goes unnoticed, unless a spell
says otherwise.
A Clear Path to the Target
To target something, you must have a clear path to it,
so it can't be behind total cover.
If you place an area of effect at a point that you
can't see and an obstruction, such as a wall, is
between you and that point, the point of origin
comes into being on the near side of that obstruction.
Targeting Yourself
If a spell targets a creature of your choice, you can
choose yourself, unless the creature must be hostile
or specifically a creature other than you. If you are in
the area of effect of a spell you cast, you can target
yourself.
Areas of Effect
Spells such as burning hands and cone of cold cover
an area, allowing them to affect multiple creatures at
once.
A spell's description specifies its area of effect,
which typically has one of five different shapes: cone,
cube, cylinder, line, or sphere. Every area of effect
has a point of origin, a location from which the
spell's energy erupts. The rules for each shape
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 102

---

specify how you position its point of origin. Typically,
a point of origin is a point in space, but some spells
have an area whose origin is a creature or an object.
A spell's effect expands in straight lines from the
point of origin. If no unblocked straight line extends
from the point of origin to a location within the area
of effect, that location isn't included in the spell's
area. To block one of these imaginary lines, an
obstruction must provide total cover.
Cone
A cone extends in a direction you choose from its
point of origin. A cone's width at a given point along
its length is equal to that point's distance from the
point of origin. A cone's area of effect specifies its
maximum length.
A cone's point of origin is not included in the
cone's area of effect, unless you decide otherwise.
Cube
You select a cube's point of origin, which lies
anywhere on a face of the cubic effect. The cube's
size is expressed as the length of each side.
A cube's point of origin is not included in the
cube's area of effect, unless you decide otherwise.
Cylinder
A cylinder's point of origin is the center of a circle of
a particular radius, as given in the spell description.
The circle must either be on the ground or at the
height of the spell effect. The energy in a cylinder
expands in straight lines from the point of origin to
the perimeter of the circle, forming the base of the
cylinder. The spell's effect then shoots up from the
base or down from the top, to a distance equal to the
height of the cylinder.
A cylinder's point of origin is included in the
cylinder's area of effect.
Line
A line extends from its point of origin in a straight
path up to its length and covers an area defined by
its width.
A line's point of origin is not included in the line's
area of effect, unless you decide otherwise.
Sphere
You select a sphere's point of origin, and the sphere
extends outward from that point. The sphere's size is
expressed as a radius in feet that extends from the
point.
A sphere's point of origin is included in the
sphere's area of effect.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Saving Throws
Many spells specify that a target can make a saving
throw to avoid some or all of a spell's effects. The
spell specifies the ability that the target uses for the
save and what happens on a success or failure.
The DC to resist one of your spells equals 8 + your
spellcasting ability modifier + your proficiency
bonus + any special modifiers.
Attack Rolls
Some spells require the caster to make an attack roll
to determine whether the spell effect hits the
intended target. Your attack bonus with a spell
attack equals your spellcasting ability modifier +
your proficiency bonus.
Most spells that require attack rolls involve
ranged attacks. Remember that you have
disadvantage on a ranged attack roll if you are within
5 feet of a hostile creature that can see you and that
isn't incapacitated.
The Schools of Magic
Academies of magic group spells into eight categories called
schools of magic. Scholars, particularly wizards, apply these
categories to all spells, believing that all magic functions in
essentially the same way, whether it derives from rigorous
study or is bestowed by a deity.
The schools of magic help describe spells; they have no
rules of their own, although some rules refer to the schools.
Abjuration spells are protective in nature, though some of
them have aggressive uses. They create magical barriers,
negate harmful effects, harm trespassers, or banish creatures
to other planes of existence.
Conjuration spells involve the transportation of objects
and creatures from one location to another. Some spells
summon creatures or objects to the caster's side, whereas
others allow the caster to teleport to another location. Some
conjurations create objects or effects out of nothing.
Divination spells reveal information, whether in the form
of secrets long forgotten, glimpses of the future, the
locations of hidden things, the truth behind illusions, or
visions of distant people or places.
Enchantment spells affect the minds of others, influencing
or controlling their behavior. Such spells can make enemies
see the caster as a friend, force creatures to take a course of
action, or even control another creature like a puppet.
Evocation spells manipulate magical energy to produce a
desired effect. Some call up blasts of fire or lightning. Others
channel positive energy to heal wounds.
Illusion spells deceive the senses or minds of others. They
cause people to see things that are not there, to miss things
that are there, to hear phantom noises, or to remember
things that never happened. Some illusions create phantom
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 103

---

images that any creature can see, but the most insidious
illusions plant an image directly in the mind of a creature.
Necromancy spells manipulate the energies of life and
death. Such spells can grant an extra reserve of lif
...[truncated]

## Conditions

Conditions
Conditions alter a creature's capabilities in a variety
of ways and can arise as a result of a spell, a class
feature, a monsters attack, or other effect. Most
conditions, such as blinded, are impairments, but a
few, such as invisible, can be advantageous.
A condition lasts either until it is countered (the
prone condition is countered by standing up, for
example) or for a duration specified by the effect
that imposed the condition.
If multiple effects impose the same condition on a
creature, each instance of the condition has its own
duration, but the condition's effects don't get worse.
A creature either has a condition or doesn't.
The following definitions specify what happens to
a creature while it is subjected to a condition.
Blinded
 A blinded creature can't see and automatically
fails any ability check that requires sight.
 Attack rolls against the creature have advantage,
and the creature's attack rolls have disadvantage.
Charmed
 A charmed creature can't attack the charmer or
target the charmer with harmful abilities or
magical effects.
 The charmer has advantage on any ability check to
interact socially with the creature.
Deafened
 A deafened creature can't hear and automatically
fails any ability check that requires hearing.
Exhaustion
Some special abilities and environmental hazards, such as
starvation and the long-term effects of freezing or scorching
temperatures, can lead to a special condition called
exhaustion. Exhaustion is measured in six levels. An effect
can give a creature one or more levels of exhaustion, as
specified in the effect's description.
Level Effect
1 Disadvantage on ability checks
2 Speed halved
3 Disadvantage on attack rolls and saving throws
4 Hit point maximum halved
5 Speed reduced to 0
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

6 Death
If an already exhausted creature suffers another effect that
causes exhaustion, its current level of exhaustion increases
by the amount specified in the effect's description.
A creature suffers the effect of its current level of
exhaustion as well as all lower levels. For example, a creature
suffering level 2 exhaustion has its speed halved and has
disadvantage on ability checks.
An effect that removes exhaustion reduces its level as
specified in the effect's description, with all exhaustion
effects ending if a creature's exhaustion level is reduced
below 1.
Finishing a long rest reduces a creature's exhaustion level
by 1, provided that the creature has also ingested some food
and drink.
Frightened
 A frightened creature has disadvantage on ability
checks and attack rolls while the source of its fear
is within line of sight.
 The creature can't willingly move closer to the
source of its fear.
Grappled
 A grappled creature's speed becomes 0, and it
can't benefit from any bonus to its speed.
 The condition ends if the grappler is incapacitated
(see the condition).
 The condition also ends if an effect removes the
grappled creature from the reach of the grappler
or grappling effect, such as when a creature is
hurled away by the thunder-wave spell.
Incapacitated
 An incapacitated creature can't take actions or
reactions.
Invisible
 An invisible creature is impossible to see without
the aid of magic or a special sense. For the purpose
of hiding, the creature is heavily obscured. The
creature's location can be detected by any noise it
makes or any tracks it leaves.
 Attack rolls against the creature have
disadvantage, and the creature's attack rolls have
advantage.
Paralyzed
 A paralyzed creature is incapacitated (see the
condition) and can't move or speak.
 The creature automatically fails Strength and
Dexterity saving throws.
 Attack rolls against the creature have advantage.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 358

---

 Any attack that hits the creature is a critical hit if
the attacker is within 5 feet of the creature.
Petrified
 A petrified creature is transformed, along with any
nonmagical object it is wearing or carrying, into a
solid inanimate substance (usually stone). Its
weight increases by a factor of ten, and it ceases
aging.
 The creature is incapacitated (see the condition),
can't move or speak, and is unaware of its
surroundings.
 Attack rolls against the creature have advantage.
 The creature automatically fails Strength and
Dexterity saving throws.
 The creature has resistance to all damage.
 The creature is immune to poison and disease,
although a poison or disease already in its system
is suspended, not neutralized.
Poisoned
 A poisoned creature has disadvantage on attack
rolls and ability checks.
Prone
 A prone creature's only movement option is to
crawl, unless it stands up and thereby ends the
condition.
 The creature has disadvantage on attack rolls.
 An attack roll against the creature has advantage if
the attacker is within 5 feet of the creature.
Otherwise, the attack roll has disadvantage.
Restrained
 A restrained creature's speed becomes 0, and it
can't benefit from any bonus to its speed.
 Attack rolls against the creature have advantage,
and the creature's attack rolls have disadvantage.
 The creature has disadvantage on Dexterity saving
throws.
Stunned
 A stunned creature is incapacitated (see the
condition), can't move, and can speak only
falteringly.
 The creature automatically fails Strength and
Dexterity saving throws.
 Attack rolls against the creature have advantage.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Unconscious
 An unconscious creature is incapacitated (see the
condition), can't move or speak, and is unaware of
its surroundings
 The creature drops whatever it's holding and falls
prone.
 The creature automatically fails Strength and
Dexterity saving throws.
 Attack rolls against the creature have advantage.
 Any attack that hits the creature is a critical hit if
the attacker is within 5 feet of the creature.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 359

---

Appendix PH-B:
Fantasy-Historical
Pantheons
The Celtic, Egyptian, Greek, and Norse pantheons are
fantasy interpretations of historical religions from
our world's ancient times. They include deities that
are most appropriate for use in a game, divorced
from their historical context in the real world and
united into pantheons that serve the needs of the
game.
The Celtic Pantheon
It's said that something wild lurks in the heart of
every soul, a space that thrills to the sound of geese
calling at night, to the whispering wind through the
pines, to the unexpected red of mistletoe on an
oak-and it is in this space that the Celtic gods dwell.
They sprang from the brook and stream, their might
heightened by the strength of the oak and the beauty
of the woodlands and open moor. When the first
forester dared put a name to the face seen in the
bole of a tree or the voice babbling in a brook, these
gods forced themselves into being.
The Celtic gods are as often served by druids as by
clerics, for they are closely aligned with the forces of
nature that druids revere.
The Greek Pantheon
The gods of Olympus make themselves known with
the gentle lap of waves against the shores and the
crash of the thunder among the cloud-enshrouded
peaks. The thick boar-infested woods and the sere,
olive-covered hillsides hold evidence of their passing.
Every aspect of nature echoes with their presence,
and they've made a place for themselves inside the
human heart, too.
Celtic Deities
Deity Alignment
The Daghdha, god of weather and crops CG
Arawn, god of life and death NE
Belenus, god of sun, light, and warmth NG
Brigantia, goddess of rivers and livestock NG
Diancecht, god of medicine and healing LG
Dunatis, god of mountains and peaks N
Goibhniu, god of smiths and healing NG
Lugh, god of arts, travel, and commerce CN
Manannan mac Lir, god of oceans and sea creatures LN
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

The Egyptian Pantheon
These gods are a young dynasty of an ancient divine
family, heirs to the rulership of the cosmos and the
maintenance of the divine principle of Ma'at-the
fundamental order of truth, justice, law, and order
that puts gods, mortal pharaohs, and ordinary men
and women in their logical and rightful place in the
universe.
The Egyptian pantheon is unusual in having three
gods responsible for death, each with different
alignments. Anubis is the lawful neutral god of the
afterlife, who judges the souls of the dead. Set is a
chaotic evil god of murder, perhaps best known for
killing his brother Osiris. And Nephthys is a chaotic
good goddess of mourning.
The Norse Pantheon
Where the land plummets from the snowy hills into
the icy fjords below, where the longboats draw up
on to the beach, where the glaciers flow forward and
retreat with every fall and spring-this is the land of
the Vikings, the home of the Norse pantheon. It's a
brutal clime, and one that calls for brutal living. The
warriors of the land have had to adapt to the harsh
conditions in order to survive, but they haven't been
too twisted by the needs of their environment. Given
the necessity of raiding for food and wealth, it's
surprising the mortals turned out as well as they did.
Their powers reflect the need these warriors had for
strong leadership and decisive action. Thus, they see
their deities in every bend of a river, hear them in
the crash of the thunder and the booming of the
glaciers, and smell them in the smoke of a burning
longhouse.
The Norse pantheon includes two main families,
the Aesir (deities of war and destiny) and the Vanir
(gods of fertility and prosperity). Once enemies,
these two families are now closely allied against
their common enemies, the giants (including the
gods Surtur and Thrym).
Suggested Domains Symbol
Nature, Trickery Bubbling cauldron or shield
Life, Death Black star on gray background
Light Solar disk and standing stones
Life Footbridge
Life Crossed oak and mistletoe branches
Nature Red sun-capped mountain peak
Knowledge, Life Giant mallet over sword
Knowledge, Life Pair of long hands
Nature, Tempest Wave of white water on green
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 360

---

Math Mathonwy, god of magic NE
Morrigan, goddess of battle CE
Nuada, god of war and warriors N
Oghma, god of speech and writing NG
Silvanus, god of nature and forests N
Greek Deities
Deity Alignment Suggeste
Zeus, god of the sky, ruler of the gods N Tempest
Aphrodite, goddess of love and beauty CG Light
Apollo, god of light, music, and healing CG Knowled
Ares, god of war and strife CE War
Artemis, goddess of hunting and childbirth NG Life, Natu
Athena, goddess of wisdom and civilization LG Knowled
Demeter, goddess of agriculture NG Life
Dionysus, god of mirth and wine CN Life
Hades, god of the underworld LE Death
Hecate, goddess of magic and the moon CE Knowled
Hephaestus, god of smithing and craft NG Knowled
Hera, goddess of marriage and intrigue CN Trickery
Hercules, god of strength and adventure CG Tempest
Hermes, god of travel and commerce CG Trickery
Hestia, goddess of home and family NG Life
Nike, goddess of victory LN War
Pan, god of nature CN Nature
Poseidon, god of the sea and earthquakes CN Tempest
Tyche, goddess of good fortune N Trickery
Egyptian Deities
Deity Alignment Sug
Re-Horakhty, god of the sun, ruler of the gods LG Life
Anubis, god of judgment and death LN De
Apep, god of evil, fire, and serpents NE Tri
Bast, goddess of cats and vengeance CG Wa
Bes, god of luck and music CN Tri
Hathor, goddess of love, music, and motherhood NG Life
Imhotep, god of crafts and medicine NG Kn
Isis, goddess of fertility and magic NG Kn
Nephthys, goddess of death and grief CG De
Osiris, god of nature and the underworld LG Life
Ptah, god of crafts, knowledge, and secrets LN Kn
Set, god of darkness and desert storms CE De
Sobek, god of water and crocodiles LE Na
Thoth, god of knowledge and wisdom N Kn
Norse Deities
Deity Alignment Suggested
Odin, god of knowledge and war NG Knowledg
Aegir, god of the sea and storms NE Tempest
Balder, god of beauty and poetry NG Life, Light
Forseti, god of justice and law N Light
Frey, god of fertility and the sun NG Life, Light
Freya, goddess of fertility and love NG Life
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Knowledge Staff
War Two crossed spears
War Silver hand on black background
Knowledge Unfurled scroll
Nature Summer oak tree
ed Domains Symbol
t Fist full of lightning bolts
Sea shell
dge, Life, Light Lyre
Spear
ure Bow and arrow on lunar disk
dge, War Owl
Mares head
Thyrsus (staff tipped with pine cone)
Black ram
dge, Trickery Setting moon
dge Hammer and anvil
Fan of peacock feathers
t, War Lions head
Caduceus (winged staff and serpents)
Hearth
Winged woman
Syrinx (pan pipes)
t Trident
Red pentagram
ggested Domains Symbol
e, Light Solar disk encircled by serpent
eath Black jackal
ickery Flaming snake
ar Cat
ickery Image of the misshapen deity
e, Light Horned cows head with lunar disk
owledge Step pyramid
owledge, Life Ankh and star
eath Horns around a lunar disk
e, Nature Crook and flail
owledge Bull
eath, Tempest, Trickery Coiled cobra
ature, Tempest Crocodile head with horns and plumes
owledge Ibis
d Domains Symbol
ge, War Watching blue eye
Rough ocean waves
Gem-encrusted silver chalice
Head of a bearded man
Ice-blue greatsword
Falcon
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 361

---

Frigga, goddess of birth and fertility N Life, Light
Heimdall, god of watchfulness and loyalty LG Light, War
Hel, goddess of the underworld NE Death
Hermod, god of luck CN Trickery
Loki, god of thieves and trickery CE Trickery
Njord, god of sea and wind NG Nature, Te
Odur, god of light and the sun CG Light
Sif, goddess of war CG War
Skadi, god of earth and mountains N Nature
Surtur, god of fire giants and war LE War
Thor, god of storms and thunder CG Tempest,
Thrym, god of frost giants and cold CE War
Tyr, god of courage and strategy LN Knowledg
Uller, god of hunting and winter CN Nature
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Cat
r Curling musical horn
Womans face, rotting on one side
Winged scroll
Flame
empest Gold coin
Solar disk
Upraised sword
Mountain peak
Flaming sword
War Hammer
White double-bladed axe
ge, War Sword
Longbow
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 362

---

Appendix PH-C:
The Planes of
Existence
The cosmos teems with a multitude of worlds as well
as myriad alternate dimensions of reality, called the
planes of existence. It encompasses every world
where GMs run their adventures, all within the
relatively mundane realm of the Material Plane.
Beyond that plane are domains of raw elemental
matter and energy, realms of pure thought and ethos,
the homes of demons and angels, and the dominions
of the gods.
Many spells and magic items can draw energy
from these planes, summon the creatures that dwell
there, communicate with their denizens, and allow
adventurers to travel there. As your character
achieves greater power and higher levels, you might
walk on streets made of solid fire or test your mettle
on a battlefield where the fallen are resurrected with
each dawn.
The Material Plane
The Material Plane is the nexus where the
philosophical and elemental forces that define the
other planes collide in the jumbled existence of
mortal life and mundane matter. All fantasy gaming
worlds exist within the Material Plane, making it the
starting point for most campaigns and adventures.
The rest of the multiverse is defined in relation to
the Material Plane.
The worlds of the Material Plane are infinitely
diverse, for they reflect the creative imagination of
the GMs who set their games there, as well as the
players whose heroes adventure there. They include
magic-wasted desert planets and island-dotted
water worlds, worlds where magic combines with
advanced technology and others trapped in an
endless Stone Age, worlds where the gods walk and
places they have abandoned.
Beyond the Material
Beyond the Material Plane, the various planes of
existence are realms of myth and mystery. They're
not simply other worlds, but different qualities of
being, formed and governed by spiritual and
elemental principles abstracted from the ordinary
world.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Planar Travel
When adventurers travel into other planes of
existence, they are undertaking a legendary journey
across the thresholds of existence to a mythic
destination where they strive to complete their
quest. Such a journey is the stuff of legend. Braving
the realms of the dead, seeking out the celestial
servants of a deity, or bargaining with an efreeti in
its home city will be the subject of song and story for
years to come.
Travel to the planes beyond the Material Plane can
be accomplished in two ways: by casting a spell or
by using a planar portal.
Spells. A number of spells allow direct or indirect
access to other planes of existence. Plane shift and
gate can transport adventurers directly to any other
plane of existence, with different degrees of
precision. Etherealness allows adventurers to enter
the Ethereal Plane and travel from there to any of
the planes it touches-such as the Elemental Planes.
And the astral projection spell lets adventurers
project themselves into the Astral Plane and travel
to the Outer Planes.
Portals. A portal is a general term for a stationary
interplanar connection that links a specific location
on one plane to a specific location on another. Some
portals are like doorways, a clear window, or a fog-
shrouded passage, and simply stepping through it
effects the interplanar travel. Others are locations-
circles of standing stones, soaring towers, sailing
ships, or even whole towns-that exist in multiple
planes at once or flicker from one plane to another
in turn. Some are vortices, typically joining an
Elemental Plane with a very similar location on the
Material Plane, such as the heart of a volcano
(leading to the Plane of Fire) or the depths of the
ocean (to the Plane of Water).
Transitive Planes
The Ethereal Plane and the Astral Plane are called
the Transitive Planes. They are mostly featureless
realms that serve primarily as ways to travel from
one plane to another. Spells such as etherealness and
astral projection allow characters to enter these
planes and traverse them to reach the planes beyond.
The Ethereal Plane is a misty, fog-bound
dimension that is sometimes described as a great
ocean. Its shores, called the Border Ethereal, overlap
the Material Plane and the Inner Planes, so that
every location on those planes has a corresponding
location on the Ethereal Plane. Certain creatures can
see into the Border Ethereal, and the see invisibility
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 363

---

and true seeing spell grant that ability. Some magical
effects also extend from the Material Plane into the
Border Ethereal, particularly effects that use force
energy such as forcecage and wall of force. The
depths of the plane, the Deep Ethereal, are a region
of swirling mists and colorful fogs.
The Astral Plane is the realm of thought and
dream, where visitors travel as disembodied souls to
reach the planes of the divine and demonic. It is a
great, silvery sea, the same above and below, with
swirling wisps of white and gray streaking among
motes of light resembling distant stars. Erratic
whirlpools of color flicker in midair like spinning
coins. Occasional bits of solid matter can be found
here, but most of the Astral Plane is an endless, open
domain.
Inner Planes
The Inner Planes surround and enfold the Material
Plane and its echoes, providing the raw elemental
substance from which all the worlds were made. The
four Elemental Planes-Air, Earth, Fire, and
Water-form a ring around the Material Plane,
suspended within the churning Elemental Chaos.
At their innermost edges, where they are closest
to the Material Plane (in a conceptual if not a literal
geographical sense), the four Elemental Planes
resemble a world in the Material Plane. The four
elements mingle together as they do in the Material
Plane, forming land, sea, and sky. Farther from the
Material Plane, though, the Elemental Planes are
both alien and hostile. Here, the elements exist in
their purest form-great expanses of solid earth,
blazing fire, crystal-clear water, and unsullied air.
These regions are little-known, so when discussing
the Plane of Fire, for example, a speaker usually
means just the border region. At the farthest extents
of the Inner Planes, the pure elements dissolve and
bleed together into an unending tumult of clashing
energies and colliding substance, the Elemental
Chaos.
Outer Planes
If the Inner Planes are the raw matter and energy
that makes up the multiverse, the Outer Planes are
the direction, thought and purpose for such
construction. Accordingly, many sages refer to the
Outer Planes as divine planes, spiritual planes, or
godly planes, for the Outer Planes are best known as
the homes of deities.
When discussing anything to do with deities, the
language used must be highly metaphorical. Their
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

actual homes are not literally "places" at all, but
exemplify the idea that the Outer Planes are realms
of thought and spirit. As with the Elemental Planes,
one can imagine the perceptible part of the Outer
Planes as a sort of border region, while extensive
spiritual regions lie beyond ordinary sensory
experience.
Even in those perceptible regions, appearances
can be deceptive. Initially, many of the Outer Planes
appear hospitable and familiar to natives of the
Material Plane. But the landscape can change at the
whims of the powerful forces that live on the Outer
Planes. The desires of the mighty forces that dwell
on these planes can remake them completely,
effectively erasing and rebuilding existence itself to
better fulfill their own needs.
Distance is a virtually meaningless concept on the
Outer Planes. The perceptible regions of the planes
often seem quite small, but they can also stretch on
to what seems like infinity. It might be possible to
take a guided tour of the Nine Hells, from the first
layer to the ninth, in a single day-if the powers of
the Hells desire it. Or it could take weeks for
travelers to make a grueling trek across a single
layer.
The most well-known Outer Planes are a group of
sixteen planes that correspond to the eight
alignments (excluding neutrality) and the shades of
distinction between them.
Outer Planes
The planes with some element of good in their
nature are called the Upper Planes. Celestial
creatures such as angels and pegasi dwell in the
Upper Planes. Planes with some element of evil are
the Lower Planes. Fiends such as demons and devils
dwell in the Lower Planes. A plane's alignment is its
essence, and a character whose alignment doesn't
match the plane's experiences a profound sense of
dissonance there. When a good creature visits
Elysium, for example (a neutral good Upper Plane),
it feels in tune with the plane, but an evil creature
feels out of tune and more than a little
uncomfortable.
Demiplanes
Demiplanes are small extradimensional spaces with
their own unique rules. They are pieces of reality
that don't seem to fit anywhere else. Demiplanes
come into being by a variety of means. Some are
created by spells, such as demiplane, or generated at
the desire of a powerful deity or other force. They
may exist naturally, as a fold of existing reality that
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 364

---

has been pinched off from the rest of the multiverse,
or as a baby universe growing in power. A given
demiplane can be entered through a single point
where it touches another plane. Theoretically, a
plane shift spell can also carry travelers to a
demiplane, but the proper frequency required for
the tuning fork is extremely hard to acquire. The
gate spell is more reliable, assuming the caster
knows of the demiplane.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 365

---

Appendix MM-A:
Miscellaneous
Creatures
This appendix contains statistics for various animals,
vermin, and other critters. The stat blocks are
organized alphabetically by creature name.
Ape
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 19 (3d8 + 6)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 6 (-2) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)
Skills Athletics +5, Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages -
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The ape makes two fist attacks.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 25/50 ft.,
one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
Awakened Shrub
Small plant, unaligned
Armor Class 9
Hit Points 10 (3d6)
Speed 20 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
3 (-4) 8 (-1) 11 (+0) 10 (+0) 10 (+0) 6 (-2)
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Damage Resistances piercing
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages one language known by its creator
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

False Appearance. While the shrub remains motionless,
it is indistinguishable from a normal shrub.
Actions
Rake. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 1 (1d4 - 1) slashing damage.
An awakened shrub is an ordinary shrub given
sentience and mobility by the awaken spell or
similar magic.
Awakened Tree
Huge plant, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 59 (7d12 + 14)
Speed 20 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 6 (-2) 15 (+2) 10 (+0) 10 (+0) 7 (-2)
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages one language known by its creator
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
False Appearance. While the tree remains motionless,
it is indistinguishable from a normal tree.
Actions
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft.,
one target. Hit: 14 (3d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
An awakened tree is an ordinary tree given
sentience and mobility by the awaken spell or
similar magic.
Axe Beak
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3)
Speed 50 ft.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 366

---

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 12 (+1) 12 (+1) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 5 (-3)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) slashing damage.
An axe beak is a tall flightless bird with strong legs
and a heavy, wedge-shaped beak. It has a nasty
disposition and tends to attack any unfamiliar
creature that wanders too close.
Baboon
Small beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 3 (1d6)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
8 (-1) 14 (+2) 11 (+0) 4 (-3) 12 (+1) 6 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages -
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Pack Tactics. The baboon has advantage on an attack
roll against a creature if at least one of the baboon's
allies is within 5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't
incapacitated.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 1 (1d4 - 1) piercing damage.
Badger
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 3 (1d4 + 1)
Speed 20 ft., burrow 5 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
4 (-3) 11 (+0) 12 (+1) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 5 (-3)
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages -
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Keen Smell. The badger has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on smell.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 1 piercing damage.
Bat
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1)
Speed 5 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
2 (-4) 15 (+2) 8 (-1) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 4 (-3)
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages -
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Echolocation. The bat can't use its blindsight while
deafened.
Keen Hearing. The bat has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 1 piercing damage.
Black Bear
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 19 (3d8 + 6)
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 10 (+0) 14 (+2) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages -
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 367

---

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Keen Smell. The bear has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on smell.
Actions
Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks: one with its
bite and one with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage.
Blink Dog
Medium fey, lawful good
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
12 (+1) 17 (+3) 12 (+1) 10 (+0) 13 (+1) 11 (+0)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +5
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Blink Dog, understands Sylvan but can't
speak it
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Keen Hearing and Smell. The dog has advantage on
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing or
smell.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage.
Teleport (Recharge 4-6). The dog magically teleports,
along with any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up
to 40 feet to an unoccupied space it can see. Before or
after teleporting, the dog can make one bite attack.
A blink dog takes its name from its ability to blink in
and out of existence, a talent it uses to aid its attacks
and to avoid harm.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Blood Hawk
Small beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 7 (2d6)
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
6 (-2) 14 (+2) 10 (+0) 3 (-4) 14 (+2) 5 (-3)
Skills Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages -
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Keen Sight. The hawk has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Pack Tactics. The hawk has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the hawk's allies is
within 5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't
incapacitated.
Actions
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage.
Taking its name from its crimson feathers and
aggressive nature, the blood hawk fearlessly attacks
almost any animal, stabbing it with its daggerlike
beak. Blood hawks flock together in large numbers,
attacking as a pack to take down prey.
Boar
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
13 (+1) 11 (+0) 12 (+1) 2 (-4) 9 (-1) 5 (-3)
Senses passive Perception 9
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Charge. If the boar moves at least 20 feet straight
toward a target and then hits it with a tusk attack on
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 368

---

the same turn, the target takes an extra 3 (1d6)
slashing damage. If the target is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
Relentless (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If
the boar takes 7 damage or less that would reduce it to
0 hit points, it is reduced to 1 hit point instead.
Actions
Tusk. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) slashing damage.
Brown Bear
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 34 (4d10 + 12)
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 10 (+0) 16 (+3) 2 (-4) 13 (+1) 7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Keen Smell. The bear has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on smell.
Actions
Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks: one with its
bite and one with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Camel
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 9
Hit Points 15 (2d10 + 4)
Speed 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 8 (-1) 14 (+2) 2 (-4) 8 (-1) 5 (-3)
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Senses passive Perception 9
Languages -
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 2 (1d4) bludgeoning damage.
Cat
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 2 (1d4)
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
3 (-4) 15 (+2) 10 (+0) 3 (-4) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages -
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Keen Smell. The cat has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on smell.
Actions
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 1 slashing damage.
Constrictor Snake
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 13 (2d10 + 2)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 1 (-5) 10 (+0) 3 (-4)
Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 369

---

Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one creature. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and
the target is grappled (escape DC 14). Until this grapple
ends, the creature is restrained, and the snake can't
constrict another target.
Crab
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 2 (1d4)
Speed 20 ft., swim 20 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
2 (-4) 11 (+0) 10 (+0) 1 (-5) 8 (-1) 2 (-4)
Skills Stealth +2
Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages -
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Amphibious. The crab can breathe air and water.
Actions
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 1 bludgeoning damage.
Crocodile
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3)
Speed 20 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 10 (+0) 13 (+1) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 5 (-3)
Skills Stealth +2
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Hold Breath. The crocodile can hold its breath for 15
minutes.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) piercing damage, and the
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

target is grappled (escape DC 12). Until this grapple
ends, the target is restrained, and the crocodile can't
bite another target.
Death Dog
Medium monstrosity, neutral evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 3 (-4) 13 (+1) 6 (-2)
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Two-Headed. The dog has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks and on saving throws against being
blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, stunned, or
knocked unconscious.
Actions
Multiattack. The dog makes two bite attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. If the target is
a creature, it must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution
saving throw against disease or become poisoned until
the disease is cured. Every 24 hours that elapse, the
creature must repeat the saving throw, reducing its hit
point maximum by 5 (1d10) on a failure. This reduction
lasts until the disease is cured. The creature dies if the
disease reduces its hit point maximum to 0.
A death dog is an ugly two-headed hound that
roams plains, and deserts. Hate burns in a death
dog's heart, and a taste for humanoid flesh drives it
to attack travelers and explorers. Death dog saliva
carries a foul disease that causes a victim's flesh to
slowly rot off the bone.
Deer
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 4 (1d8)
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 370

---

Speed 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
11 (+0) 16 (+3) 11 (+0) 2 (-4) 14 (+2) 5 (-3)
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages -
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 2 (1d4) piercing damage.
Dire Wolf
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 37 (5d10 + 10)
Speed 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
17 (+3) 15 (+2) 15 (+2) 3 (-4) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Keen Hearing and Smell. The wolf has advantage on
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing or
smell.
Pack Tactics. The wolf has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the wolf's allies is
within 5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't
incapacitated.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is
a creature, it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving
throw or be knocked prone.
Draft Horse
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3)
Speed 40 ft.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 10 (+0) 12 (+1) 2 (-4) 11 (+0) 7 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Eagle
Small beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 3 (1d6)
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
6 (-2) 15 (+2) 10 (+0) 2 (-4) 14 (+2) 7 (-2)
Skills Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages -
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Keen Sight. The eagle has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) slashing damage.
Elephant
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 76 (8d12 + 24)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
22 (+6) 9 (-1) 17 (+3) 3 (-4) 11 (+0) 6 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP)
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 371

---

Trampling Charge. If the elephant moves at least 20
feet straight toward a creature and then hits it with a
gore attack on the same turn, that target must succeed
on a DC 12 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone.
If the target is prone, the elephant can make one
stomp attack against it as a bonus action.
Actions
Gore. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 19 (3d8 + 6) piercing damage.
Stomp. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one prone creature. Hit: 22 (3d10 + 6) bludgeoning
damage.
Elk
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 13 (2d10 + 2)
Speed 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 10 (+0) 12 (+1) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 6 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Charge. If the elk moves at least 20 feet straight
toward a target and then hits it with a ram attack on
the same turn, the target takes an extra 7 (2d6)
damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on
a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone.
Actions
Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one prone creature. Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) bludgeoning
damage.
Flying Snake
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 14
Hit Points 5 (2d4)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
4 (-3) 18 (+4) 11 (+0) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 5 (-3)
Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages -
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Flyby. The snake doesn't provoke opportunity attacks
when it flies out of an enemy's reach.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 1 piercing damage plus 7 (3d4) poison
damage.
A flying snake is a brightly colored, winged serpent
found in remote jungles. Tribespeople and cultists
sometimes domesticate flying snakes to serve as
messengers that deliver scrolls wrapped in their
coils.
Frog
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1)
Speed 20 ft., swim 20 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
1 (-5) 13 (+1) 8 (-1) 1 (-5) 8 (-1) 3 (-4)
Skills Perception +1, Stealth +3
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages -
Challenge 0 (0 XP)
Amphibious. The frog can breathe air and water.
Standing Leap. The frog's long jump is up to 10 feet
and its high jump is up to 5 feet, with or without a
running start.
A frog has no effective attacks. It feeds on small
insects and typically dwells near water, in trees, or
underground. The frog's statistics can also be used to
represent a toad.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 372

---

Giant Ape
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 157 (15d12 + 60)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
23 (+6) 14 (+2) 18 (+4) 7 (-2) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)
Skills Athletics +9, Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages -
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The ape makes two fist attacks.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 22 (3d10 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 50/100
ft., one target. Hit: 30 (7d6 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Giant Badger
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 13 (2d8 + 4)
Speed 30 ft., burrow 10 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
13 (+1) 10 (+0) 15 (+2) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 5 (-3)
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Keen Smell. The badger has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on smell.
Actions
Multiattack. The badger makes two attacks: one with
its bite and one with its claws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) slashing damage.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Giant Bat
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 22 (4d10)
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 16 (+3) 11 (+0) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 6 (-2)
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Echolocation. The bat can't use its blindsight while
deafened.
Keen Hearing. The bat has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage.
Giant Boar
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 42 (5d10 + 15)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
17 (+3) 10 (+0) 16 (+3) 2 (-4) 7 (-2) 5 (-3)
Senses passive Perception 8
Languages -
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Charge. If the boar moves at least 20 feet straight
toward a target and then hits it with a tusk attack on
the same turn, the target takes an extra 7 (2d6)
slashing damage. If the target is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
Relentless (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If
the boar takes 10 damage or less that would reduce it
to 0 hit points, it is reduced to 1 hit point instead.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 373

---

Actions
Tusk. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage.
Giant Centipede
Small beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 4 (1d6 + 1)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
5 (-3) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 1 (-5) 7 (-2) 3 (-4)
Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage, and the
target must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving
throw or take 10 (3d6) poison damage. If the poison
damage reduces the target to 0 hit points, the target is
stable but poisoned for 1 hour, even after regaining hit
points, and is paralyzed while poisoned in this way.
Giant Constrictor Snake
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 60 (8d12 + 8)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 1 (-5) 10 (+0) 3 (-4)
Skills Perception +2
Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages -
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
creature. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage.
Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one creature. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage,
and the target is grappled (escape DC 16). Until this
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

grapple ends, the creature is restrained, and the snake
can't constrict another target.
Giant Crab
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 13 (3d8)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
13 (+1) 15 (+2) 11 (+0) 1 (-5) 9 (-1) 3 (-4)
Skills Stealth +4
Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages -
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Amphibious. The crab can breathe air and water.
Actions
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) bludgeoning damage, and the
target is grappled (escape DC 11). The crab has two
claws, each of which can grapple only one target.
Giant Crocodile
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 85 (9d12 + 27)
Speed 30 ft., swim 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
21 (+5) 9 (-1) 17 (+3) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 7 (-2)
Skills Stealth +5
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Hold Breath. The crocodile can hold its breath for 30
minutes.
Actions
Multiattack. The crocodile makes two attacks: one
with its bite and one with its tail.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 374

---

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 21 (3d10 + 5) piercing damage, and the
target is grappled (escape DC 16). Until this grapple
ends, the target is restrained, and the crocodile can't
bite another target.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target not grappled by the crocodile. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5)
bludgeoning damage. If the target is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 16 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
Giant Eagle
Large beast, neutral good
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 26 (4d10 + 4)
Speed 10 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 17 (+3) 13 (+1) 8 (-1) 14 (+2) 10 (+0)
Skills Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages Giant Eagle, understands Common and
Auran but can't speak them
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Keen Sight. The eagle has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Multiattack. The eagle makes two attacks: one with its
beak and one with its talons.
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage.
Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage.
A giant eagle is a noble creature that speaks its own
language and understands speech in the Common
tongue. A mated pair of giant eagles typically has up
to four eggs or young in their nest (treat the young
as normal eagles).
Giant Elk
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 42 (5d12 + 10)
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Speed 60 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 7 (-2) 14 (+2) 10 (+0)
Skills Perception +4
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages Giant Elk, understands Common, Elvish, and
Sylvan but can't speak them
Challenge 2 (450 XP)
Charge. If the elk moves at least 20 feet straight
toward a target and then hits it with a ram attack on
the same turn, the target takes an extra 7 (2d6)
damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on
a DC 14 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone.
Actions
Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one prone creature. Hit: 22 (4d8 + 4) bludgeoning
damage.
The majestic giant elk is rare to the point that its
appearance is often taken as a foreshadowing of an
important event, such as the birth of a king. Legends
tell of gods that take the form of giant elk when
visiting the Material Plane. Many cultures therefore
believe that to hunt these creatures is to invite
divine wrath.
Giant Fire Beetle
Small beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 4 (1d6 + 1)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
8 (-1) 10 (+0) 12 (+1) 1 (-5) 7 (-2) 3 (-4)
Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages -
Challenge 0 (10 XP)
Illumination. The beetle sheds bright light in a 10-foot
radius and dim light for an additional 10 feet.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 375

---

Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 2 (1d6 - 1) slashing damage.
A giant fire beetle is a nocturnal creature that takes
its name from a pair of glowing glands that give off
light. Miners and adventurers prize these creatures,
for a giant fire beetle's glands continue to shed light
for 1d6 days after the beetle dies. Giant fire beetles
are most commonly found underground and in dark
forests.
Giant Frog
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 18 (4d8)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
12 (+1) 13 (+1) 11 (+0) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 3 (-4)
Skills Perception +2, Stealth +3
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Amphibious. The frog can breathe air and water.
Standing Leap. The frog's long jump is up to 20 feet
and its high jump is up to 10 feet, with or without a
running start.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage, and the target
is grappled (escape DC 11). Until this grapple ends, the
target is restrained, and the frog can't bite another
target.
Swallow. The frog makes one bite attack against a
Small or smaller target it is grappling. If the attack hits,
the target is swallowed, and the grapple ends. The
swallowed target is blinded and restrained, it has total
cover against attacks and other effects outside the frog,
and it takes 5 (2d4) acid damage at the start of each of
the frog's turns. The frog can have only one target
swallowed at a time.
If the frog dies, a swallowed creature is no longer
restrained by it and can escape from the corpse using 5
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

feet of movement, exiting prone.
Giant Goat
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
17 (+3) 11 (+0) 12 (+1) 3 (-4) 12 (+1) 6 (-2)
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages -
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Charge. If the goat moves at least 20 feet straight
toward a target and then hits it with a ram attack on
the same turn, the target takes an extra 5 (2d4)
bludgeoning damage. If the target is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
Sure-Footed. The goat has advantage on Strength and
Dexterity saving throws made against effects that
would knock it prone.
Actions
Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
Giant Hyena
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 45 (6d10 + 12)
Speed 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Rampage. When the hyena reduces a creature to 0 hit
points with a melee attack on its turn, the hyena can
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 376

---

take a bonus action to move up to half its speed and
make a bite attack.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage.
Giant Lizard
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 12 (+1) 13 (+1) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 5 (-3)
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage.
A giant lizard can be ridden or used as a draft
animal. Lizardfolk also keep them as pets, and
subterranean giant lizards are used as mounts and
pack animals by drow, duergar, and others.
Giant Octopus
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 52 (8d10 + 8)
Speed 10 ft., swim 60 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
17 (+3) 13 (+1) 13 (+1) 4 (-3) 10 (+0) 4 (-3)
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Hold Breath. While out of water, the octopus can hold
its breath for 1 hour.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Underwater Camouflage. The octopus has advantage
on Dexterity (Stealth) checks made while underwater.
Water Breathing. The octopus can breathe only
underwater.
Actions
Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 15 ft.,
one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If
the target is a creature, it is grappled (escape DC 16).
Until this grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the
octopus can't use its tentacles on another target.
Ink Cloud (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). A 20-
foot-radius cloud of ink extends all around the octopus
if it is underwater. The area is heavily obscured for 1
minute, although a significant current can disperse the
ink. After releasing the ink, the octopus can use the
Dash action as a bonus action.
Giant Owl
Large beast, neutral
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3)
Speed 5 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
13 (+1) 15 (+2) 12 (+1) 8 (-1) 13 (+1) 10 (+0)
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Giant Owl, understands Common, Elvish,
and Sylvan but can't speak them
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Flyby. The owl doesn't provoke opportunity attacks
when it flies out of an enemy's reach.
Keen Hearing and Sight. The owl has advantage on
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing or
sight.
Actions
Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 8 (2d6 + 1) slashing damage.
Giant owls often befriend fey and other sylvan
creatures and are guardians of their woodland
realms.
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 377

---

Giant Poisonous Snake
Medium beast, unaligned
Armor Class 14
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
10 (+0) 18 (+4) 13 (+1) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 3 (-4)
Skills Perception +2
Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (1d4 + 4) piercing damage, and the target
must make a DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking
10 (3d6) poison damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one.
Giant Rat
Small beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 7 (2d6)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
7 (-2) 15 (+2) 11 (+0) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 4 (-3)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Keen Smell. The rat has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on smell.
Pack Tactics. The rat has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the rat's allies is
within 5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't
incapacitated.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

Variant: Diseased Giant Rats
Some giant rats carry vile diseases that they spread with their
bites. A diseased giant rat has a challenge rating of 1/8 (25
XP) and the following action instead of its normal bite attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving
throw or contract a disease. Until the disease is cured, the
target can't regain hit points except by magical means, and
the target's hit point maximum decreases by 3 (1d6) every 24
hours. If the target's hit point maximum drops to 0 as a result
of this disease, the target dies.
Giant Scorpion
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 52 (7d10 + 14)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 13 (+1) 15 (+2) 1 (-5) 9 (-1) 3 (-4)
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages -
Challenge 3 (700 XP)
Actions
Multiattack. The scorpion makes three attacks: two
with its claws and one with its sting.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and the
target is grappled (escape DC 12). The scorpion has two
claws, each of which can grapple only one target.
Sting. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) piercing damage, and the
target must make a DC 12 Constitution saving throw,
taking 22 (4d10) poison damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful one.
Giant Sea Horse
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 16 (3d10)
Speed 0 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
12 (+1) 15 (+2) 11 (+0) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 5 (-3)
ersonal use only. System Reference Document 5.1 378

---

Senses passive Perception 11
Languages -
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Charge. If the sea horse moves at least 20 feet straight
toward a target and then hits it with a ram attack on
the same turn, the target takes an extra 7 (2d6)
bludgeoning damage. It the target is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
Water Breathing. The sea horse can breathe only
underwater.
Actions
Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) bludgeoning damage.
Like their smaller kin, giant sea horses are shy,
colorful fish with elongated bodies and curled tails.
Aquatic elves train them as mounts.
Giant Shark
Huge beast, unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 126 (11d12 + 55)
Speed 0 ft., swim 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
23 (+6) 11 (+0) 21 (+5) 1 (-5) 10 (+0) 5 (-3)
Skills Perception +3
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages -
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)
Blood Frenzy. The shark has advantage on melee attack
rolls against any creature that doesn't have all its hit
points.
Water Breathing. The shark can breathe only
underwater.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 22 (3d10 + 6) piercing damage.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe

A giant shark is 30 feet long and normally found in
deep oceans. Utterly fearless, it preys on anything
that crosses its path, including whales and ships.
Giant Spider
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 26 (4d10 + 4)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 16 (+3) 12 (+1) 2 (-4) 11 (+0) 4 (-3)
Skills Stealth +7
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive
Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Spider Climb. The spider can climb difficult surfaces,
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to
make an ability check.
Web Sense. While in contact with a web, the spider
knows the exact location of any other creature in
contact with the same web.
Web Walker. The spider ignores movement restrictions
caused by webbing.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage, and the
target must make a DC 11 Constitution saving throw,
taking 9 (2d8) poison damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one. If the poison
damage reduces the target to 0 hit points, the targ
...[truncated]